: while the argument as a whole is built up from 
its component parts, presented one by one in linear succession, to under-
stand those parts you need a synthetic view of the whole.13
Specialists of late antiquity will notice quickly that my approach to 
Hermetic spirituality is somewhat different from the usual one. Most 
	12	 Hanegraaff, Het einde van de hermetische traditie; Hanegraaff and Bouthoorn, Lodovico 
Lazzarelli (1447–1500): The Hermetic Writings and Related Documents; Hanegraaff, 
“Better than Magic”; Hanegraaff, “Hermetism”; Hanegraaff, “How Hermetic was 
Renaissance Hermetism?”; Hanegraaff, “Hermes Trismegistus & Hermetism.”
	11	 Hanegraaff, “Teaching Experiential Dimensions”; Hanegraaff, “Entheogenic Esoteri-
cism”; Hanegraaff, “Gnosis”; Hanegraaff, “Theosophical Imagination.” As regards late 
antiquity, the present book wholly supersedes my first attempt in this direction, “Altered 
States of Knowledge.” The present work I see as my mature statement on these topics.
	13	 See the quotation by Gadamer at the very end of Chapter 10 (pp. 350–351).

Prologue
7
scholarship in this domain is ultimately less concerned with meaning 
and the understanding of content than with tracing the genealogy of 
separate elements from a historical and comparative perspective. Thus 
when the Hermetica use a certain term or describe a certain concept, 
the first thing that most scholars will ask themselves is “where does this 
originally come from?” and “where else do we find this in the litera-
ture of the period?” This approach has led to voluminous commentaries 
filled with invaluable information about parallels and origins, and I am 
deeply indebted to the precious information they contain. However, the 
methodology carries considerable risks of misinterpretation, as may be 
illustrated by an example from contemporary culture. Imagine a histo-
rian from the remote future who discovers a lost archive of American 
self-help books. She finds that a certain Deepak Chopra wrote a best-
selling book about a mysterious practice called “quantum healing.”14 
What does that mean? Our historian dives into the archives and writes 
a learned commentary to this ancient book. She describes the early 
­twentieth-century origins of this practice in a long-superseded scientific 
field known as quantum physics and presents a mountain of evidence for 
textual parallels about quanta in contemporary scientific periodicals. All 
of that is enormously interesting. But does it help 