Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
In Egypt during the first centuries of the Common Era, men and women 
would meet discreetly in their homes, in temple sanctuaries, or in sol-
itary places to learn a powerful practice of spiritual liberation. They 
thought of themselves as followers of Hermes Trismegistus, the legend-
ary master of ancient wisdom. While many of their writings are lost, 
those that survived have been interpreted primarily as philosophical 
treatises about theological topics. Wouter J. Hanegraaff challenges this 
dominant narrative by demonstrating that Hermetic literature was con-
cerned with experiential practices intended for healing the soul from 
mental delusion. The Way of Hermes involved radical alterations of 
consciousness in which practitioners claimed to perceive the true nature 
of reality behind the hallucinatory veil of appearances. Hanegraaff 
explores how practitioners went through a training regime that involved 
luminous visions, exorcism, spiritual rebirth, cosmic consciousness, and 
union with the divine beauty of universal goodness and truth to attain 
the salvational knowledge known as gnōsis.
Wouter J. Hanegraaff is Professor of History of Hermetic Philosophy 
and Related Currents at the University of Amsterdam. He is the author 
of six monographs, including New Age Religion and Western Culture 
(1996) and Esotericism and the Academy (2012), and editor of eight 
collective works, including the Dictionary of Gnosis and Western 
Esotericism (2005).



University Printing House, Cambridge cb2 8bs, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, ny 10006, usa
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, vic 3207, Australia
314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre,  
New Delhi – 110025, India
103 Penang Road, #05–06/07, Visioncrest Commercial, Singapore 238467
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of 
education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781009123068
doi: 10.1017/9781009127936
© Cambridge University Press 2022
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception  
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,  
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written  
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2022
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
names: Hanegraaff, Wouter J., author.
title: Hermetic spirituality and the historical imagination : altered
states of knowledge in late antiquity / Wouter J. Hanegraaff.
description: Cambridge, United Kingdom ; New York, ny : Cambridge
University Press, 2022. | Includes bibliographical references and index.
identifiers: lccn 2021059216 (print) | lccn 2021059217 (ebook) | 
isbn 9781009123068 (hardback) | isbn 9781009127936 (ebook)
subjects: lcsh: Hermetism. | Spirituality – History. | Knowledge, Theory
of – History. | Civilization, Ancient. | BISAC: RELIGION / History
classification: lcc bf1591 .h34 2022  (print) | lcc bf1591  (ebook) |  
ddc 135/.45–dc23/eng/20220210
lc record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021059216
lc ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021059217
isbn 978-1-009-12306-8 Hardback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of 
URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication  
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,  
accurate or appropriate.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
In Egypt during the first centuries of the Common Era, men and women 
would meet discreetly in their homes, in temple sanctuaries, or in sol-
itary places to learn a powerful practice of spiritual liberation. They 
thought of themselves as followers of Hermes Trismegistus, the legend-
ary master of ancient wisdom. While many of their writings are lost, 
those that survived have been interpreted primarily as philosophical 
treatises about theological topics. Wouter J. Hanegraaff challenges this 
dominant narrative by demonstrating that Hermetic literature was con-
cerned with experiential practices intended for healing the soul from 
mental delusion. The Way of Hermes involved radical alterations of 
consciousness in which practitioners claimed to perceive the true nature 
of reality behind the hallucinatory veil of appearances. Hanegraaff 
explores how practitioners went through a training regime that involved 
luminous visions, exorcism, spiritual rebirth, cosmic consciousness, and 
union with the divine beauty of universal goodness and truth to attain 
the salvational knowledge known as gnōsis.
Wouter J. Hanegraaff is Professor of History of Hermetic Philosophy 
and Related Currents at the University of Amsterdam. He is the author 
of six monographs, including New Age Religion and Western Culture 
(1996) and Esotericism and the Academy (2012), and editor of eight 
collective works, including the Dictionary of Gnosis and Western 
Esotericism (2005).



University Printing House, Cambridge cb2 8bs, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, ny 10006, usa
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, vic 3207, Australia
314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre,  
New Delhi – 110025, India
103 Penang Road, #05–06/07, Visioncrest Commercial, Singapore 238467
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of 
education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781009123068
doi: 10.1017/9781009127936
© Cambridge University Press 2022
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception  
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,  
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written  
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2022
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
names: Hanegraaff, Wouter J., author.
title: Hermetic spirituality and the historical imagination : altered
states of knowledge in late antiquity / Wouter J. Hanegraaff.
description: Cambridge, United Kingdom ; New York, ny : Cambridge
University Press, 2022. | Includes bibliographical references and index.
identifiers: lccn 2021059216 (print) | lccn 2021059217 (ebook) | 
isbn 9781009123068 (hardback) | isbn 9781009127936 (ebook)
subjects: lcsh: Hermetism. | Spirituality – History. | Knowledge, Theory
of – History. | Civilization, Ancient. | BISAC: RELIGION / History
classification: lcc bf1591 .h34 2022  (print) | lcc bf1591  (ebook) |  
ddc 135/.45–dc23/eng/20220210
lc record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021059216
lc ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021059217
isbn 978-1-009-12306-8 Hardback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of 
URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication  
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,  
accurate or appropriate.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
In Egypt during the first centuries of the Common Era, men and women 
would meet discreetly in their homes, in temple sanctuaries, or in sol-
itary places to learn a powerful practice of spiritual liberation. They 
thought of themselves as followers of Hermes Trismegistus, the legend-
ary master of ancient wisdom. While many of their writings are lost, 
those that survived have been interpreted primarily as philosophical 
treatises about theological topics. Wouter J. Hanegraaff challenges this 
dominant narrative by demonstrating that Hermetic literature was con-
cerned with experiential practices intended for healing the soul from 
mental delusion. The Way of Hermes involved radical alterations of 
consciousness in which practitioners claimed to perceive the true nature 
of reality behind the hallucinatory veil of appearances. Hanegraaff 
explores how practitioners went through a training regime that involved 
luminous visions, exorcism, spiritual rebirth, cosmic consciousness, and 
union with the divine beauty of universal goodness and truth to attain 
the salvational knowledge known as gnōsis.
Wouter J. Hanegraaff is Professor of History of Hermetic Philosophy 
and Related Currents at the University of Amsterdam. He is the author 
of six monographs, including New Age Religion and Western Culture 
(1996) and Esotericism and the Academy (2012), and editor of eight 
collective works, including the Dictionary of Gnosis and Western 
Esotericism (2005).



University Printing House, Cambridge cb2 8bs, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, ny 10006, usa
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, vic 3207, Australia
314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre,  
New Delhi – 110025, India
103 Penang Road, #05–06/07, Visioncrest Commercial, Singapore 238467
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of 
education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781009123068
doi: 10.1017/9781009127936
© Cambridge University Press 2022
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception  
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,  
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written  
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2022
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
names: Hanegraaff, Wouter J., author.
title: Hermetic spirituality and the historical imagination : altered
states of knowledge in late antiquity / Wouter J. Hanegraaff.
description: Cambridge, United Kingdom ; New York, ny : Cambridge
University Press, 2022. | Includes bibliographical references and index.
identifiers: lccn 2021059216 (print) | lccn 2021059217 (ebook) | 
isbn 9781009123068 (hardback) | isbn 9781009127936 (ebook)
subjects: lcsh: Hermetism. | Spirituality – History. | Knowledge, Theory
of – History. | Civilization, Ancient. | BISAC: RELIGION / History
classification: lcc bf1591 .h34 2022  (print) | lcc bf1591  (ebook) |  
ddc 135/.45–dc23/eng/20220210
lc record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021059216
lc ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021059217
isbn 978-1-009-12306-8 Hardback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of 
URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication  
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,  
accurate or appropriate.

For Margôt, ἡ πηγή μου τῆς ζωῆς καὶ τοῦ φωτός


vii
Contents
Acknowledgments	
page ix
Abbreviations	
xiii
	Prologue
1
1	
Hermetic Spirituality
11
To Know the Unknowable	
12
Philosophy against Egypt	
16
The Spiritual Turn	
19
2	
Heart of Darkness
23
Thessalos in Thebes	
26
The Light of the Godhead	
31
Toward the Light	
35
Private Experiential Practices	
42
3	
The Presence of Gods
48
Distant Voices	
50
The Religion of the World	
53
Terrestrial Gods	
61
The Age of Darkness	
72
4	
Children of Hermes
77
Getting Together in Private	
79
Matter and the Soul	
82
The Divine Economy	
87
Deep Embodiment	
99
Gods at Work	
106
Innate Gnōsis and Powerful Sounds	
112

viii
Contents
	 5	 Through a Glass Darkly
119
At the Mercy of Scribes	
123
Hermetica and Hermeneutics	
132
Weirdness at the Center	
138
	 6	 Healing the Soul
145
Ignorance	
148
Enlightenment	
156
The Story of Humanity	
167
The Missionary	
179
	 7	 The Path of Reverence
187
The Beauty of Goodness and Truth	
190
Reverence and Astonishment	
194
Hermetic Psychology	
200
The Third Kind	
209
	 8	 Becoming Alive
220
The Path of Hermes	
225
Spiritual Madness	
235
Born Again	
244
Gratitude	
256
	 9	 The Source
264
The Silent One	
266
Dimensions of Life	
271
Beyond Rebirth	
282
The Sounding Cosmos	
288
Beyond the Stars	
297
10	 The Conquest of Time
308
The Drug	
311
The Inscription	
318
Dissemination	
327
Transmission	
335
Thoth’s Secret	
342
	Epilogue
352
Bibliography	
369
Index of Texts	
411
Index of Persons	
418
Index of Subjects	
428

ix
Acknowledgments
In the spring of 1991, I bought a copy of the Corpus Hermeticum, in a 
brand-new Dutch translation that had just recently been published. There 
was quite some interest for Hermetic literature in the Netherlands at that 
time, largely due to the spectacular and widely publicized efforts of the 
Bibliotheca Philosophica Hermetica in Amsterdam. This privately funded 
research library was in the midst of building up the world’s largest collec-
tion of original editions and secondary literature about Hermetic philoso-
phy and related currents, and it had made this new publication possible 
as well. As a young scholar in the early stages of my Ph.D. research at the 
University of Utrecht, I was fascinated by these developments and eager 
to learn more about those mysterious Hermetic writings. I happened to 
be part of a small reading group focused on “gnostic” traditions, and 
still have a written copy of a presentation I apparently gave in this con-
text, titled “Salvation by Gnosis in the Corpus Hermeticum” – my first 
embryonic attempt at understanding what the Hermetic literature was 
all about. But as I kept coming back to these texts during the years that 
followed, I could never shake off the uncomfortable feeling that some-
how, something remained less than fully convincing about how these 
texts were being discussed in the scholarly literature or translated into 
modern languages. What, if anything, was missing? This book is my 
attempt to answer that question in the only way that such questions can 
be answered, by going all the way ad fontes.
It has been an incredible adventure, for I discovered much more than I 
had ever imagined. But I would never have had the chance to even embark 
on such a project at all if it had not been for two people who changed the 
course of my life during the 1990s, Roelof van den Broek and Rosalie 

x
Acknowledgments
Basten. It is thanks to them that I have been able to devote my life and my 
career to studying the Hermetic literature and a wide range of related his-
torical currents from antiquity to the present. The historian of Christianity 
Roelof van den Broek, one of the two scholars responsible for the 1991 
Dutch Corpus Hermeticum translation, became my first model of schol-
arly excellence in these domains. We first met in his office at the University 
of Utrecht, and ended up collaborating closely on a whole series of proj-
ects related to the Hermetic literature. Roelof’s sharp and sober judgment 
as a scholar and his generosity as a human being have been invaluable to 
me, as have been his perceptive critical comments on earlier versions of 
this book, not to mention his detailed commentaries on the Hermetica 
that are available only in the Dutch language.
It so happened that around the same time, Rosalie Basten, a Dutch 
businesswoman fascinated by the Hermetica, was reading the Dutch 
Corpus Hermeticum as well. It made a big impression, and led her to 
contact Roelof van den Broek, in order to discuss with him a project 
she had been pondering for years: to create conditions that would make 
it possible for future students to study these traditions as an academic 
subject. Their meeting was a success, and what came out of their collabo-
ration was a unique academic chair and Centre for History of Hermetic 
Philosophy and Related Currents (HHP), created at the University of 
Amsterdam in 1999. The Corpus Hermeticum was therefore at the very 
origin of a remarkable chain of events that began in 1991, one outcome 
of which is this book about the Hermetica published more than thirty 
years later. It has been the honor and true miracle of my life that I was 
entrusted with the new academic chair in Amsterdam and was given the 
chance to devote myself, together with a group of dedicated colleagues 
and friends, to building up a program in teaching and research that had 
no parallel anywhere else in the academy worldwide. HHP has been like 
a pebble thrown in a pond, creating a ripple effect that keeps extending 
into ever-widening circles, so that today we have a large and vibrant 
international field of scholarship that is still branching out further into 
new directions. None of this would have happened without Rosalie’s 
enormous determination and continuous support – not to mention a 
whole series of further initiatives that, with her uncanny intuition for 
always choosing “the right time and the right place,” she has been taking 
on behalf of our field over a period of several decades now. I am deeply 
grateful for her friendship and her incredible generosity.
This is the place to also thank the members of the Foundation for History of 
Hermetic Philosophy and Related Currents, for all their support throughout 

xi
Acknowledgments
the years; all my colleagues who have been affiliated to our Amsterdam 
Centre from 1999 to the present, for their collegiality and friendship; and 
all the students who have been passing through our program, for their often 
infectious enthusiasm and curiosity about things unknown. It has been a 
pleasure to work with all of them, and their presence has been a continuous 
source of inspiration. I want to give special thanks here to Marco Pasi, my 
long-term friend and collaborator in all these endeavors and my successor as 
HHP’s director since 2019. I owe him a big debt of gratitude, for his wisdom 
and support in times of hardship and adversity as well as of happiness and 
success. Furthermore, I would like to mention the international organization 
devoted to our field of study, the European Society for the Study of Western 
Esotericism (ESSWE), which was founded at Rosalie Basten’s residence in 
2005. As I sat laboring on this book in the solitude of my study, it was 
essential for me to feel part of this large and continuously evolving network 
of scholars, students, and friends who understand and appreciate what our 
kind of work is all about.
Very special thanks must go to a small group of brilliant younger friends 
and colleagues, endowed with superior specialist expertise and truly impres-
sive linguistic skills, whose critical feedback, help and advice have been 
indispensable: Nicholas Banner, Christian Bull, Dylan Burns, and Korshi 
Dosoo. I owe each one of them a particularly great debt of gratitude for 
their willingness to read my chapter drafts with so much care and attention 
to even the tiniest details, for giving me precious advice about a wide range 
of important issues, for teaching me many things I did not know, and last 
but not least, for catching mistakes that would otherwise have escaped me. 
For any errors that might still remain, the responsibility is of course entirely 
mine. During the final stages of writing this book, it has been a special joy 
to participate in our small Zoom-fellowship of dedicated kratērians (created 
at Dylan’s initiative), reading Hermetic treatises in Greek together while 
discussing the mysteries of translation and some other secrets as well.
Other colleagues and friends have been helping me out by answer-
ing questions and responding to specific requests. In particular, I want 
to thank Joscelyn Godwin for reassuring me about some musicologi-
cal issues; Matteo Martelli for his help with translations from ancient 
Syriac; Matthew Melvin-Koushki for all his support and for sharing 
materials related to Suhrawardī and Pythagoreanism; Liana Saif for 
double-checking Arabic transliteration; Gregory Shaw for commenting 
on my chapters about Iamblichus and theurgy; Christian Wildberg for 
sharing a few of his unpublished translations and textual editions; and 
Timothy Williamson for clarifying my thinking about the very nature of 

xii
Acknowledgments
knowledge. Furthermore I want to thank my former student Bas Jacobs 
for his detailed remarks about the entire manuscript; my friend and col-
league Jeffrey J. Kripal for his unwavering support and unique perspec-
tives on what the study of religion is all about; and my even older friend 
and colleague Albert F. de Jong for all his warmth and generous enthusi-
asm about whatever I am up to at any time.
Finally, I want to thank three people whose importance and influence 
go far beyond scholarship and academic discussion. Whenever I think 
about the pharmakon of gnōsis and the Hermetic kratēr filled with nous, 
I see the face of Norberto Jurasek. His unexpected death in March 2020, 
at the age of just 45, has left a wound that will never be entirely healed. 
This book owes more to him and the inspiration he has given me than 
could or should be written down in words. In an entirely different way, 
the same is true of another extraordinary human being, my mother Leonie 
Hanegraaff-Lissenberg. She passed away just briefly before Norberto, in 
February 2020, at the age of 92. Whatever I have been able to do in my 
life, I owe to her unconditional love and support. And last but certainly 
not least, this book is dedicated to Margôt, the love of my life. Since you 
appeared on my horizon early in 2013, nothing has ever been the same. 
I want to thank you most of all for sharing with me the gifts of love and 
abundance that this book is ultimately all about – life, health, happiness, 
and open paths.

xiii
Abbreviations
Ascl.	
Asclepius
CAA I	
M. Berthelot and Ch.-Em. Ruelle (eds.), Collection des anciens 
alchimistes grecs, vol. 1, Georges Steinheil: Paris 1887.
CAA II	
M. Berthelot and Ch.-Em. Ruelle (eds.), Collection des anciens 
alchimistes grecs, vol. 2, Georges Steinheil: Paris 1888.
CH	
Corpus Hermeticum
CHD	
Carsten Colpe and Jens Holzhausen (eds.), Das Corpus 
Hermeticum Deutsch, vol. 1: Jens Holzhausen (transl. & 
introd.), Die griechischen Traktate und der lateinische 
“Asclepius,” & vol. 2: Jens Holzhausen (transl. & introd.), 
Exzerpte, Nag-Hammadi-Texte, Testimonien, frommann-
holzboog: Stuttgart/Bad Cannstatt 1997.
CMA II	
M. Berthelot (ed.), La chimie au moyen âge, vol. 2, Imprimerie 
Nationale: Paris 1893.
Cop	
Brian P. Copenhaver (transl. & comm.), Hermetica: The 
Greek Corpus Hermeticum and the Latin Asclepius in a New 
English Translation with Notes and Introduction, Cambridge 
University Press 1992.
GWHT	
Dorothee Gall (ed.), Die göttliche Weisheit des Hermes 
Trismegistos: Pseudo-Apuleius, Asclepius, Mohr Siebeck: 
Tübingen 2021.
HD	
Hermetic Definitions
HF	
Hermetic Fragments (= HT IV “Fragments Divers”)
HG	
Roelof van den Broek and Gilles Quispel (introd., transl., & 
comm.), Hermetische geschriften, In de Pelikaan: Amsterdam 
2016.

xiv
Abbreviations
HHE I	
Jean-Pierre Mahé, Hermès en Haute-Égypte, vol. 1: Les 
textes Hermétiques de Nag Hammadi et leurs parallèles grecs 
et latins, Les Presses de l’Université Laval: Québec 1978.
HHE II	
Jean-Pierre Mahé, Hermès en Haute-Égypte, vol. 2: Le frag-
ment du Discours Parfait et les Définitions Hermétiques 
Arméniennes, Les Presses de l’Université Laval: Québec 1982.
HO	
Hermetica Oxoniensa (Oxford Hermetica)
HT I	
Hermès Trismégiste, vol. 1: Corpus Hermeticum I-XII (A.D. 
Nock and A.-J. Festugière), Les Belles Lettres: Paris 1991 
[1946].
HT II	
Hermès Trismégiste, vol. 2: Corpus Hermeticum XIII-XVIII, 
Asclepius (A.D. Nock and A.-J. Festugière), Les Belles Lettres: 
Paris 1992 [1946].
HT III	
Hermès Trismégiste, vol. 3: Fragments extraits de Stobée 
I-XXII (A.-J. Festugière), Les Belles Lettres: Paris 2002 
[1954].
HT IV	
Hermès Trismégiste, vol. 4: Fragments extraits de Stobée 
XXIII-XXIX, Fragments divers (A.-J. Festugière), Les Belles 
Lettres: Paris 2002 [1954].
HT V	
Hermès Trismégiste, vol. 5: Paralipomènes (Nag Hammadi VI, 
6–8, Clarkianus 11, Hermetic Definitions, Divers Fragments) 
(J.-P. Mahé), Les Belles Lettres: Paris 2019.
HV	
Hermetica Vindobonensia (Vienna Hermetica).
Keizer	
Lewis S. Keizer, “The Eighth Reveals the Ninth: Tractate 6 
of Nag Hammadi Codex VI,” Ph.D. Dissertation, Graduate 
Theological Union: Berkeley 1973.
KL	
Martin Krause and Pahor Labib, Gnostische und Hermetische 
Schriften aus Codex II und Codex VI, J.J. Augustin: Glückstadt 
1971.
Meyer	
Marvin Meyer (ed.), The Nag Hammadi Scriptures: The 
Revised and Updated Translation of Sacred Gnostic Texts, 
Harper One: New York 2007.
NH VI	
Nag Hammadi Codex VI
NHD	
Hans-Martin Schenke, Hans-Gebhard Bethge, and Ursula 
Ulrike Kaiser, Nag Hammadi Deutsch, vol. 2: NHC V,2-XIII,1, 
BG 1 und 4, Walter de Gruyter: Berlin/New York 2003.
NHDS	
Ursula Ulrike Kaiser and Hans-Gebhard Bethge (eds.), Nag 
Hammadi Deutsch: Studienausgabe, 3rd revised ed., Walter 
de Gruyter: Berlin/Boston 2013.

xv
Abbreviations
PDM	
Papyri Graecae Magicae: Demotic Papyri
PGM	
Papyri Graecae Magicae
RHT I	
A.-J. Festugière, La révélation d’Hermès Trismégiste, vol. 1: 
L’astrologie et les sciences occultes, Les Belles Lettres: Paris 
1942.
RHT II	
A.-J. Festugière, La révélation d’Hermès Trismégiste, vol. 2: 
Le Dieu cosmique, Les Belles Lettres: Paris 1949.
RHT III	 A.-J. Festugière, La révélation d’Hermès Trismégiste, vol. 3: 
Les doctrines de l’âme, Les Belles Lettres: Paris 1953.
RHT IV	 A.-J. Festugière, La révélation d’Hermès Trismégiste, vol. 4: 
Le Dieu inconnu et la gnose, Les Belles Lettres: Paris 1954.
Rob	
James M. Robinson (ed.), The Nag Hammadi Library in 
English, E.J. Brill: Leiden/New York/Copenhagen/Cologne 
1988.
SA	
Clement Salaman, Asclepius: The Perfect Discourse of 
Hermes Trismegistus, Duckworth: London 2007.
Scott I	
Walter Scott, Hermetica: The Ancient Greek and Latin 
Writings Which Contain Religious or Philosophic Teachings 
Ascribed to Hermes Trismegistus, vol. 1: Texts and 
Translation, repr. Shambhala: Boston 1993 [1924].
Scott II	
Walter Scott, Hermetica: The Ancient Greek and Latin 
Writings Which Contain Religious or Philosophic Teachings 
Ascribed to Hermes Trismegistus, vol. 2: Notes on the Corpus 
Hermeticum, repr. Shambhala: Boston 1985 [1925].
Scott III	 Walter Scott, Hermetica: The Ancient Greek and Latin 
Writings Which Contain Religious or Philosophic Teachings 
Ascribed to Hermes Trismegistus, vol. 3: Notes on the Latin 
Asclepius and the Hermetic Excerpts of Stobaeus, repr. 
Shambhala: Boston 1985 [1926].
Scott IV	 Walter Scott and A.S. Ferguson, Hermetica: The Ancient 
Greek and Latin Writings Which Contain Religious or 
Philosophic Teachings Ascribed to Hermes Trismegistus, vol. 
4: Testimonia, repr. Shambhala: Boston 1985 [1936].
SEC	
Alberto Camplani, Scritti ermetici in copto, Paideia: Brescia 
2000.
SH	
Stobaei Hermetica
Tröger	
Karl-Wolfgang Tröger, “Die sechste und siebte Schrift aus 
Nag-Hammadi-Codex VI,” Theologische Literaturzeitung 
98:7 (1973), 495–503.

xvi
Abbreviations
WHCH	
Clement Salaman, Dorine van Oyen and William D. Wharton 
(transl.), The Way of Hermes: The Corpus Hermeticum, 
Duckworth: London 1999.
WHDH	 Jean-Pierre Mahé (transl.), The Definitions of Hermes 
Trismegistus to Asclepius, in WHCH, 99–122.
ZMA	
Zosimos 
of 
Panopolis, 
Mémoires 
authentiques 
(Les 
Alchimistes Grecs IV.1; Michèle Mertens, ed. & transl.), Les 
Belles Lettres: Paris 1995.

1
	2	 Although “to know” is one of the ten most common verbs in English and belongs to the 
fewer than one hundred words with precise translations in all 6000+ human languages, 
interestingly enough “we still do not fully understand what knowledge is” (Nagel, 
Knowledge, 6, 116). Like the Greek gnōsis, “knowledge” is ultimately derived from the 
proto-Indo-European *gno- (“to know”), but English misses the ability to differentiate 
between propositional knowledge (e.g. German wissen, French savoir) and knowledge by 
immediate acquaintance (e.g. German kennen, French connaître); see Chapter 4, p. 113 
note 147.
Sein, das verstanden werden kann, ist Sprache.
Hans-Georg Gadamer1
This book is about the search for knowledge, the human experience of 
being in touch with how things really are.2 I will be analyzing a collec-
tion of ancient texts that claim to reveal the true nature of reality and 
describe  a way toward liberation from mental delusion. Their anony-
mous authors referred to such knowledge as gnōsis and described it as 
ultimately inexpressible in human language. And yet they were using 
language to make such claims, and in writing a book about them I have 
been doing the same. Can scholars tell the truth about truths beyond 
scholarship? Or can truth not be told but only experienced? If what we 
call knowledge is a function of our state of mind, then could there be 
other ways of knowing than those of reason and the senses?
Prologue
	1	 “Being that can be understood is language.” Gadamer, Hermeneutik I, 478. On fre-
quent misunderstandings of this famous quotation and their far-reaching implications, 
see Di Cesare, Gadamer, 155–156; Di Cesare, Utopia of Understanding, 4–6 (with 
reference notably to Gadamer, “Idee des Hegelschen Logik,” 84; Gadamer, “Dialo-
gischer Rückblick,” 286: “But no, I have never thought or said that, that everything is 
language”).

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
2
These are deep philosophical questions that have inspired me in my 
work, but to which I do not claim to have the answers. I very much doubt 
whether anybody does or ever will. My objectives in this book are far 
more modest in comparison, although admittedly still ambitious. On the 
first and most obvious surface level, you will be reading a study of the 
Hermetic literature from Roman Egypt in which I deliberately attempt 
to change the narrative of what these treatises are all about. On a sec-
ond level immediately below the surface, this book is concerned with the 
historical imagination and the powerful effects of telling stories.3 We use 
words to tell other people about what we have understood or think we 
have understood, but our language and our way of using it is never just 
a simple tool of translation and communication – it is always a means 
of enchantment as well.4 All writers try to put a spell on their audience. 
They attempt to catch and hold their readers’ attention, gain influence 
over their consciousness, and induce them to follow their own lead in 
preference over others. This is true of the anonymous authors who wrote 
the Hermetic treatises, and it is no less true of the scholars who studied 
these texts in depth and whose learned publications dominate academic 
discourse and the academic imagination. Most obviously, of course, it is 
true of myself as well. I would not have devoted years of my life to study-
ing the Hermetica and the abundant scholarship about them if I did not 
wish to convince my readers that a better story was possible and that it 
needed to be told.
But why does it need to be told? Where does the importance lie? This 
leads me to a third dimension of my project. In our mediatized culture 
built on speed and instant gratification, the relevance of a book about 
ancient Hermetic texts may not be immediately obvious. Yet it is pre-
cisely in that fact that the relevance lies. Readers who decide to follow my 
lead through the Hermetic labyrinth will learn about the spell of phan-
tasmata, the unruly stream of mental imagery charged with emotion that 
fills much of our conscious and unconscious life on a daily basis. How 
can we trust our own thinking or rely on our faculties of knowledge 
and rational judgment, as scholars or just as human beings, if we are 
	4	 See below, Epilogue. A locus classicus is Plato, Phaedrus 230d-e, where Lysias’ written 
speech is described as a pharmakon or drug of enchantment strong enough to lure even 
Socrates out of the city (Derrida, La dissémination, 87–88; see discussion in Chapter 10, 
pp. 311–318).
	3	 See Hanegraaff, “Religion and the Historical Imagination.” For my central concept of 
“reified imaginative formations,” see Hanegraaff, “Reconstructing Religion,” 578–581 
(here illustrated at the example of “religion”).

Prologue
3
not in control of our own minds? The subtitle of this book refers to the 
unquestionable fact that human consciousness is not stable and reliable 
but fluid and susceptible to alteration,5 so that what we hold to be “true” 
must depend very much on how and where we are able (or unable) to 
direct our attention. Alterations of consciousness result in altered states 
of knowledge.6
Hermetic practitioners believed that the horizon of human conscious-
ness could not just be expanded but could be transcended altogether, 
resulting in those states of absolute knowledge and direct insight to which 
they referred as gnōsis. As may be inferred from the opening sentences 
of my Prologue, this conviction would have made them deeply scepti-
cal about a book like this. They would have argued that scholarly or 
academic knowledge of any kind (empirical, historical, phenomenologi-
cal, hermeneutic, exegetical, rational, critical, and so on) could never be 
more than the product of a comparatively low-level, low-quality, altered, 
narrowed, reduced, and therefore ultimately untrustworthy type of con-
sciousness. Of course, the easiest way for me to respond to such scepti-
cism would be to flip the argument around – as almost all scholars in this 
field have done – by assuming implicity, or stating explicitly, that not my 
reliance on scholarly methods but their belief in gnōsis must be an irra-
tional illusion, a pious “mystical” dogma without any true foundation. 
In making such an argument, I would be dismissing their most basic core 
	6	 In this regard I sympathize with Charles T. Tart’s radical concept of knowledge as “state-
specific”: see Tart, “States of Consciousness” (1972; updated versions in Tart, States of 
Consciousness, 206–228 [1983] and “Investigating Altered States” [1998]; see also his 
response to a few critics in [Diverse authors], “State-Specific Sciences,” 1007–1008 and 
short remarks in “Preface,” xvi–xviii). Hermetic spirituality as analyzed in this book may 
be seen in terms of “state-specific technologies, operated in the service of a priori belief 
systems,” whereas state-specific sciences (which I take to include scholarly research in the 
humanities) would be defined by the investigator’s commitment “to reexamine constantly 
his own belief system and to question the ‘obvious,’ in spite of its intellectual or emo-
tional appeal to him” (States of Consciousness, 217–218; “Investigating Altered States,” 
111). Whether state-specific sciences are possible or not, the relevant point for me is that 
different modalities of consciousness imply different types of knowledge.
	5	 E.g. Barušs, Alterations of Consciousness, 4–11. In terms of Barušs’s four-part typol-
ogy, when I speak of “consciousness” in general terms I mean his consciousness3. The 
Hermetic treatises contain descriptions of subjective consciousness2 (the stream of 
events experienced by individual minds) and of behavioral consciousness2 (first-person 
accounts). Hence when I speak of consciousness as fluid and susceptible to alteration, I 
mean the experiential stream of subjective consciousness2 (phenomenal consciousness in 
terms of Dainton, Stream of Consciousness, 2–4). While the processes of consciousness1 
are always present and active, their neurological modes of functioning are less immedi-
ately relevant for research in the humanities.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
4
conviction, the central assumption on which all their ­endeavors were 
built. I would be taking it for granted that only the type of sober con-
sciousness required for scholarly work can be relied on for gaining true 
knowledge, so that the radical altered states of Hermetic practitioners 
must be some kind of delusion or aberration.
I am not making that assumption. This book as a whole (and here I 
reach the fourth dimension of my argument) exemplifies a perspective of 
radical methodological agnosticism, which means that I neither affirm 
nor deny the ultimate truth of Hermetic beliefs.7 The gnōsis that they 
considered possible I see as beyond either verification or falsification. 
Agnosticism does not reflect an attitude of intellectual laziness or indif-
ference on my part, as when in common parlance we say “whatever…!” 
because we do not wish to engage with an argument although we pri-
vately think of it as nonsense. On the contrary, it rests on a fundamental 
conviction about the limits of human knowledge and understanding.8 
The authors of the spiritual Hermetica claimed to have attained perfect 
knowledge of realities far beyond the scope of what most scholars would 
consider possible, and I see no reason not to take them seriously. After 
all, what do I know? I have not been there. The divine nous has not 
appeared to me, my body has not been exorcized, my soul has not been 
reborn, nor have I ever traveled in my mind to an utterly nondual reality 
of pure spiritual bliss. As will be seen, Hermetic practitioners claim that 
they did experience all those things and that it radically changed their 
lives. I cannot claim to know for sure whether they made it all up, or 
	8	 For critique of the ignorabimus thesis, see Asprem, Problem of Disenchantment, 304–
306. I would respond that the aporias of knowledge, the limits of human horizons, and 
the biological conditioning of human brains make the alternative cognoscemus or cog-
noverimus (“we will get to know,” “we will have come to know”) even far more implau-
sible. In this respect, the classical concept of disenchantment is based not on knowledge 
but on beliefs, assumptions or presuppositions (Weber, Wissenschaft als Beruf; Asprem, 
Problem of Disenchantment, 33–34). In terms of the authors discussed in this book, 
methodological agnosticism seems remarkably congenial to Iamblichus’ perspective of 
radical embodiment as analyzed in Chapter 4.
	7	 Hanegraaff, “Empirical Method,” 100–108; Hanegraaff, Esotericism and the Academy, 
357–358; Hanegraaff, “Power of Ideas,” 2–5. Methodological agnosticism in my under-
standing is broadly congenial to the radical empiricism associated with William James 
(see Lamberth, William James, 9–60) and I find myself in sympathy with its recent discus-
sion in Davis, High Weirdness, 8–30. I share the latter’s “dissatisfaction with the ideal-
ism of religious and mystical thinking, on the one hand, and the stinginess of the usual 
reductionism on the other” and his search for “a middle way, a hybrid path” (ibid., 8). 
On the history of “agnosticism,” see Asprem, Problem of Disenchantment, 289–308; 
regarding methodological agnosticism, as my methods and objectives are not explanatory 
but hermeneutic, the objections formulated in Asprem, ibid., 85 note 118 do not apply.

Prologue
5
were deluding themselves, or whether some of them might actually have 
been experiencing such things. If I hypothesize that they did, as I am will-
ing to do, still I cannot claim to possess some superior level of insight that 
would allow me to explain with any certainty what really happened to 
them. And so I do not.
What I do know is that these authors left us a series of fascinating 
texts in which they speak about their beliefs, their practices, and their 
experiences. I consider it my job as a scholar to do what I can to under-
stand what they were trying to tell their readers. That brings me back 
to the beginning, and to my fifth and final core concern in this book, 
the ­mysteries of language and translation. What does it mean to put 
something – anything – in words? What is involved in using language to 
describe an experience as “unspeakable”? Does it make a difference in 
this regard whether our words are spoken or written down? Can written 
sources like the Hermetica ever transmit to us what the authors wanted 
to say, or do they consist of nothing but empty signifiers at the mercy of 
our own discourse? Is it possible for linguistic meaning to not get lost in 
translation? If so, what does it mean to practice the art of hermēneia, the 
interpretation of texts? What are its limits and its potentials? By forcing 
us to ask such questions, the Hermetic discourse of gnōsis and noēsis 
(direct “noetic” perception of ultimate reality) confronts us with the 
unavoidable aporias of human understanding.
Summing up, the texture of this book is woven from five different 
strands. The argument about language and hermeneutics speaks to my 
broader vision of what the humanities are or should be all about, for 
reasons that I discuss at the end of Chapter 10. A practice of radical 
empiricism and methodological agnosticism is central to my understand-
ing of the study of religion as a neither religionist nor reductionist field 
of research.9 My interest in the historical imagination and the effects 
of narratives and storytelling, to which I will return in the Epilogue, 
is a further development of my work about Western esotericism as the 
reified imaginal product of discursive dynamics through which domi-
nant academic traditions define their identity by way of contrast with a 
negative wastebasket category of “rejected knowledge.”10 My focus on 
consciousness comes from my earlier work on entheogenic esotericism 
	10	 Hanegraaff, Esotericism and the Academy. For the notion of “imaginal,” see below, 
Epilogue.
	 9	 See also Hanegraaff, “Reconstructing ‘Religion’ from the Bottom Up”; Hanegraaff, 
“Imagining the Future Study of Religion and Spirituality.”

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
6
(sensu lato and sensu stricto) and on alterations of consciousness as 
a neglected core dimension of religion and spirituality.11 Finally, the 
so-called Hermetic tradition has been an object of fascination for me 
throughout my professional life;12 but whereas my earlier work was 
focused on the Renaissance revival of the Hermetica, in this book I 
travel back all the way to the sources in Roman Egypt.
As regards questions of theory and method, I largely adopt a “show, 
don’t tell” approach. Rather than presenting these five dimensions sepa-
rately as theoretical perspectives explained in general or abstract terms, I 
have adopted a deliberately narrative procedure in that I allow them, like 
the characters of a novel, to unfold and unveil themselves gradually over 
the course of ten chapters. Such a linear storytelling style of scholarly 
writing has peculiar advantages and attractions, which I hope my readers 
will appreciate, but I am aware that it carries risks as well. Rather than 
revealing all my plots and subplots in advance or giving you the benefit 
of a bird’s-eye view, dear reader, I ask you to step right into the narrative 
and enjoy the pleasures of discovering or unraveling its secrets step by 
step, as you make your way forward while staying close to the ground. 
Unless you are blessed with an extraordinary memory, be warned that 
by the time you reach the final pages, you may need to go back and read 
the whole thing again to pull the various strands together. Again, the 
best analogy is a novel. Readers may not understand why the protago-
nist acts the way she does in the first chapters, as the author deliberately 
keeps them in the dark; so only at rereading the story with the benefit of 
hindsight, what initially seemed puzzling may begin to make sense. Or at 
least, so one hopes. This is how my book is written and so this is how it 
wants to be read. Formulated differently, it requires a reading practice of 
hermeneutic circularity: while the argument as a whole is built up from 
its component parts, presented one by one in linear succession, to under-
stand those parts you need a synthetic view of the whole.13
Specialists of late antiquity will notice quickly that my approach to 
Hermetic spirituality is somewhat different from the usual one. Most 
	12	 Hanegraaff, Het einde van de hermetische traditie; Hanegraaff and Bouthoorn, Lodovico 
Lazzarelli (1447–1500): The Hermetic Writings and Related Documents; Hanegraaff, 
“Better than Magic”; Hanegraaff, “Hermetism”; Hanegraaff, “How Hermetic was 
Renaissance Hermetism?”; Hanegraaff, “Hermes Trismegistus & Hermetism.”
	11	 Hanegraaff, “Teaching Experiential Dimensions”; Hanegraaff, “Entheogenic Esoteri-
cism”; Hanegraaff, “Gnosis”; Hanegraaff, “Theosophical Imagination.” As regards late 
antiquity, the present book wholly supersedes my first attempt in this direction, “Altered 
States of Knowledge.” The present work I see as my mature statement on these topics.
	13	 See the quotation by Gadamer at the very end of Chapter 10 (pp. 350–351).

Prologue
7
scholarship in this domain is ultimately less concerned with meaning 
and the understanding of content than with tracing the genealogy of 
separate elements from a historical and comparative perspective. Thus 
when the Hermetica use a certain term or describe a certain concept, 
the first thing that most scholars will ask themselves is “where does this 
originally come from?” and “where else do we find this in the litera-
ture of the period?” This approach has led to voluminous commentaries 
filled with invaluable information about parallels and origins, and I am 
deeply indebted to the precious information they contain. However, the 
methodology carries considerable risks of misinterpretation, as may be 
illustrated by an example from contemporary culture. Imagine a histo-
rian from the remote future who discovers a lost archive of American 
self-help books. She finds that a certain Deepak Chopra wrote a best-
selling book about a mysterious practice called “quantum healing.”14 
What does that mean? Our historian dives into the archives and writes 
a learned commentary to this ancient book. She describes the early 
­twentieth-century origins of this practice in a long-superseded scientific 
field known as quantum physics and presents a mountain of evidence for 
textual parallels about quanta in contemporary scientific periodicals. All 
of that is enormously interesting. But does it help us understand what 
Chopra meant? Did he actually write about quanta at all? Is it adequate 
to situate him in the history of quantum physics (and then blame him 
for so often misunderstanding its concepts)? Shouldn’t we rather begin 
by asking what quantum healing meant for him, within his discourse, 
rather than what quanta “really” meant in the twentieth century or 
what they meant for others?15
Few scholars would disagree with the principle that an adequate his-
torical approach to Hermetic spirituality, as to any other religious or 
spiritual phenomenon, must begin with studying the relevant primary 
sources in their own right and on their own terms. But the implication is 
that not unless we first manage to understand, as well as possible, what 
they actually mean – what their authors were trying to say and what we 
	14	 Chopra, Quantum Healing.
	15	 This approach is basic to all my work. When my New Age Religion and Western Culture 
was published in 1996, it was virtually the first academic study (for the exception see 
ibid., 3 note 11) based on actually reading the primary sources of the New Age, ­focusing 
on their contents and trying to understand what the authors meant to say. Almost all 
existing scholarship at that time showed far more interest in making the New Age fit 
already-existing theoretical frameworks that made sense to academics than in finding 
out what made sense to New Agers.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
8
can tell from the texts themselves16 – will it even become possible for 
us to determine the historical trajectories and contexts of comparison 
in which they must be situated.17 For instance, a major red thread that 
runs through my book concerns the Hermetic understanding of nous – a 
term that is perfectly common in ancient Greek philosophical discourse. 
Instead of assuming that I already know what this word means (some-
thing like “mind” or “intellect,” as every dictionary will tell us), I want 
the authors of the Hermetica to tell me what it meant for them. As will 
be seen, their answers are surprising to say the least, and the implica-
tions are considerable. If their understanding of nous is in fact different 
from what we commonly take it to mean, can we still be so sure about 
those standard translations on which we normally rely? Formulated dif-
ferently, is the Hermetic nous a conceptual anomaly, or should it lead us 
to reconsider our assumptions about what we take to mean “mind” or 
“intellect” in ancient philosophy?
As I argue at greater length at the end of Chapter 5, scholars are 
no exception to the rule that humans tend to explain the unfamiliar in 
terms of the familiar, the unknown in terms of the known. In academic 
research, this has profoundly conservative effects. It privileges conven-
tional understandings of how things are, while blinding us to whatever is 
different and does not comfortably fit our established paradigms.18 In this 
book I take exactly the opposite approach. As my central concern is with 
	18	 For a fundamental critique of established practice in the study of ancient religions, see 
the chapter “On Comparison” in Smith, Drudgery Divine, 36–53, esp. 47–48 (with 
reference to a crucial quotation from Smith, To Take Place, 14) and see Smith, “In 
Comparison a Magic Dwells,” 21–22: what counts as “comparison” is usually little 
more than a scholar’s spontaneous experience of being reminded of “something like it,” 
followed by the projection of that subjective experience “as an objective connection 
through some theory of influence, diffusion, borrowing, or the like.” In such a “homeo-
pathic magic” of comparison built on erudition, the issue of difference tends to be for-
gotten (ibid., 21, 35). Among countless examples of this fallacy in scholarship of the 
	16	 I am referring to the core principle of modern hermeneutics that the meaning of texts is not 
exhausted by an explication of authorial intent (e.g. Simms, Hans-Georg Gadamer, 1). 
For my basic position on textual research and noneclectic historiography, see ­Hanegraaff, 
Esotericism and the Academy, 364–367, 377–379.
	17	 Smith, “In Comparison a Magic Dwells,” 34: “Who would disagree? We must describe 
what we are comparing before we compare.” I concur, although with the Gadamerian 
proviso that any description is already an interpretation, informed by comparison with 
what falls within the reader’s hermeneutic horizon. See also George Steiner’s program-
matic statement about the historian’s task: “The historian must ‘get it right.’ He must 
determine not only what was said (which may prove exceedingly difficult given the state 
of documents and the conflicts of testimony), but what was meant to be said and at what 
diverse levels of understanding the saying was to be received” (After Babel, 141).

Prologue
9
difference, I try to understand the unfamiliar and explore the unknown, 
allowing it to defamiliarize the scholarly knowledge that we tend to take 
for granted. This leads me back to my opening sentences. If knowledge 
is the experience of being in touch with how things are, procedures of 
questioning and destabilizing our certainties in this regard may lead to 
altered states of knowledge. Only if we first understand what we are 
really dealing with, in these strange Hermetic treatises, can we establish 
what to compare them with or where to look for their historical origins.
The object of study in this book is neither “the Hermetic tradition” 
nor “the Hermetic literature” per se. The former I see as a scholarly 
construct of considerable popular appeal but questionable validity, while 
the latter refers to a collection of clearly disparate texts that have some-
times little else in common than mere references to Hermes Trismegistus 
as a figure of authority.19 The focus is instead on what I call “Hermetic 
spirituality,” for reasons discussed in Chapter 1; and I explain there why 
this implies a new way of categorizing the relevant materials. Chapter 2 
is meant to introduce my readers to Roman Egypt in the first centuries 
ce and discusses the importance in that context of private spiritual expe-
riences. Having set the scene in these first two chapters, in Chapter 3, I 
introduce my readers to the basic Hermetic worldview by focusing on the 
Logos Teleios and its Latin and Coptic translations. Chapter 4 is about 
the only three practitioners of Hermetic spirituality who are still known 
to us by name: the alchemist Zosimos of Panopolis and his associate 
Theosebeia, and the Platonic theurgist Iamblichus of Chalcis. To prepare 
for my in-depth analysis of Hermetic spirituality in the second half of the 
book, Chapter 5 discusses the problems of textual transmission and my 
strategies for confronting the task of reconstruction and interpretation.
In the next four chapters, I dive deeply into the texts. Chapter 6 is 
focused on CH I, the famous “Poimandres,” and discusses the basic 
Hermetic concern with healing the soul from its contamination by the 
	19	 On the problematics of a reified “Hermetic tradition,” see e.g. Hanegraaff, Esotericism 
and the Academy, 327–334 (focusing on Frances Yates); van Bladel, Arabic Hermes, 
17–22 (for the Arabic context). Generally on the construction or invention of tradi-
tion, see e.g. Hammer, Claiming Knowledge, 85–200; many contributions in Kilcher, 
Constructing Tradition and Lewis and Hammer, Invention of Sacred Tradition. On the 
lack of coherence that results from defining our corpus as “Hermetic” merely because 
texts mention Hermes Trismegistus, see Hanegraaff, Review of Lucentini-Parri-Perrone 
Compagni.
Hermetica, see for instance the obsession with biblical or early Christian “parallels” in 
Dodd, Bible and the Greeks or Grese, Corpus Hermeticum XIII; and discussion of the 
“Fall of Man” projected on CH I, pp. 170–175.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
10
negative passions. Chapter 7 discusses the essential Hermetic virtue of 
reverence (eusebeia) in connection with learning to “open one’s heart” 
to divine beauty, and culminates in a discussion of what it meant to 
“become the aiōn” as described in CH XI. Chapter 8 is about the crucial 
treatise known as CH XIII, the account of rebirth, in which Hermes helps 
his pupil Tat to get liberated from the powers of darkness that have taken 
possession of his body. In Chapter 9, we see how Tat after being reborn 
is led to a supreme hypercosmic experience of the Ogdoad, the dimension 
of divinized souls, the Ennead of noetic powers, and even the pēgē, the 
supreme Source of all manifestation. In Chapter 10, finally, we return to 
earth and explore the question of what it means to transmit such experi-
ences through the medium of language. Can the unspeakable be spoken 
or transmitted through writing? We end up with the art and practice 
of hermēneia, interpretation or understanding, that takes its name from 
Hermes.
Hermetic spirituality was a joyful path that celebrated life and light. 
Its purpose was to heal the soul from negativity, free it from such power-
ful influences as fear and aggression, and open its eyes to the beauty of 
existence. It was not concerned with domination but with knowledge and 
understanding – or, more precisely, with knowledge as understanding. It 
is in such a thoroughly positive spirit, inspired by enthousiasmos, that I 
offer this book to my readers for their pleasure and education.

11
Qui non intelligit res, non potest ex verbis sensum elicere.
Martin Luther1
In Egypt during the first centuries of the Common Era, men and women 
would meet discreetly in their homes, in temple sanctuaries, or in solitary 
places to learn a powerful practice of spiritual liberation. They thought 
of themselves as followers of Hermes Trismegistus, the legendary master 
of ancient wisdom. Pupils would listen to venerable teachers speaking 
about the nature of the cosmos – its admirable beauty, its harmonious 
structure, its mysterious depths, and the subtle dangers it posed to the 
human soul. They would learn about the supreme universal Source of 
Life and Light that was ever-present behind the screen of appearances 
and in the depths of their own minds. They were taught that human 
beings could open the eyes of the heart, leave delusion behind, connect 
to the Source, and perceive reality as it really is. And last but not least, 
they learned how to do it. The teachers claimed to have gone through 
profound experiences of inner transformation and spiritual rebirth; they 
had encountered transcendent beings and traveled out of their bodies to 
places beyond the stars; and so they could offer guidance and advice to 
pupils who wished to follow in their footsteps. But the Way of Hermes 
was not an easy path. It required patience and devotion, trust and dis-
cipline, diligent study, persistent practice, and a willingness to question 
conventional wisdom.
1
Hermetic Spirituality
	1	 Luther, Tischreden, Bd. 5, 26 [nr. 5246]. “He who does not understand the thing cannot 
elicit the meaning from the words.”

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
12
To Know the Unknowable
To speak about these practices as “Hermetic spirituality” means ­breaking 
with a longstanding tradition in academic research. Scholars have long 
been used to speaking of Hermetic philosophy instead, but we will see that 
this terminology is misleading.2 To explain why this is so, and why it mat-
ters, I will begin with the term “spirituality.” Some modern readers might 
feel it makes these ancient groups look a bit too much like contemporary 
New Age practitioners, and trained classicists will be quick to point out 
that such modern terminology does not correspond exactly to its equiv-
alents in ancient Greek. To address these objections, we may consider 
some pertinent observations by the French scholar André-Jean Festugière 
(1898–1982), a classicist and Dominican friar whose work dominated the 
study of the Hermetica until the 1970s. The passage in question, quoted 
below, confronts us head-on with a problem that will occupy us through-
out this book: the enormous difficulties of translation and understanding 
across the thresholds of language, time, and culture. Even just rendering 
Festugière’s words from modern French into English is far from easy, but 
we will see that the problem in this case goes deeper than that of intercul-
tural translation from one language to another. Nothing less is at stake 
here than the paradox of translation across the threshold of language 
itself. Festugière was discussing a Greek word, nous, that happens to be 
so central to the Hermetica that we absolutely need to get it right.
[T]he philosophical language of Platonism lacked a specific term for referring to 
an organ of perception meant exclusively for mystical intuition. If one divides 
all that exists in noēton [that which can be thought] and aisthēton [that which 
can be perceived by the senses], then God belongs evidently on the side of the 
former. But by calling him that, one simply wants to make clear that he does 
not have a body – one does not mean to say that he can actually be known 
or understood through discursive language and can be named. This ambiguity 
of the word noēton comes from the ambiguity of the Platonic nous. Its func-
tion is to perceive realities that can be thought. However, when we are dealing 
with that particular noēton referred to as God, then the nous is no longer the 
human “intellect” properly speaking but a pure faculty of intuition or spiritual 
apprehension.3
	2	 Cf. Van den Kerchove, La voie, 1, 92; Kingsley, “An Introduction,” 33.
	3	 RHT IV, 138–139. My translation slightly modifies the French original in the interest of 
clarity. Notably, I give the Greek terms in transliteration. Throughout the rest of this vol-
ume, I write nous in small letters whenever it seems to mean primarily a human capacity 
or metaphysical reality, but capitalize it as Nous if the latter functions as a deity.

Hermetic Spirituality
13
We see here that, in discussing the idea of direct transcendental 
­knowledge by means of a human faculty referred to as nous, Festugière 
appears unable to avoid terms that are hardly less ambiguous in French 
or English, notably “spiritual” and “mystical,” not to mention “intu-
ition.”4 The significance of this point emerges from the remainder of the 
passage:
As moderns we have at our disposal the word “spirit” and its derivatives “spiri-
tual,” “spiritualizing,” “spirituality,” which have become technical terms in 
the literature of devotion. But the Greek pneuma [breath, spirit] appeared 
too much tainted with materiality to play that role5: no Platonist would have 
dreamed even for a second to apply it to phenomena that, while beyond human 
understanding, still implied the entire intellectual ascent towards the prime 
noēton. And so it is that the same word nous refers at the same time to the nor-
mal instrument for knowing things that can be thought and to the instrument 
of mystical intuition that enters into contact with the anoēton [that which can 
not be thought].6
For moderns like us, to say that something “cannot be thought” means 
that our mind cannot grasp it. Our mind, of course, resides in our brain 
and is concerned with rational thinking. However, according to ancient 
Egyptian, Semitic, and Greek anthropologies, our intellectual faculties 
rather resided in the heart.7 This must very much be kept in mind (or 
taken to heart) while reading the Hermetica, where we often encounter 
references to “knowledge of the heart” or perception through the “eyes 
of the heart.”8 For moderns it can be more natural in such cases to 
speak of “spiritual knowledge” and think of “the soul” rather than “the 
mind,” although this conflicts in many ways with the original meaning 
and connotations of such central terms as pneuma (“spirit”), psuchē 
	4	 The term “mysticism” would deserve separate treatment and is particularly problematic 
in the work of Roman Catholic authors such as Festugière. General overview in Schmidt, 
“Making of Modern ‘Mysticism’”; for a short discussion of my perspective, see Hane-
graaff, “Teaching Experiential Dimensions,” 154–158, with critical discussion of Louis 
Bouyer’s classic treatment in “Mysticism.”
	5	 Cf. Sedley, “Thrice-Greatest Hermes,” 8: “… although pneuma was latinized as spiritus, 
in a Greek philosophical or scientific context the adjective ‘pneumatic’ has, if anything, 
more in common with pneumatic drills than with Christian spirituality.”
	6	 RHT IV, 139. The same argument about nous appears in Festugière, Personal Religion, 
45; cf. Grese, Corpus Hermeticum XIII, 5 note d.
	7	 Broze and Van Liefferinge, “L’Hermès commun,” 43 with note 38; Kingsley, “Poiman-
dres,” 51; Tardieu, Écrits gnostiques, 232–233; Onians, Origins, 82–83 (Homer).
	8	 See discussion below, p. 200 with notes 53–54.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
14
(“soul”), nous (“mind”), or kardia (“heart”).9 The problem is that mod-
ern terms seldom if ever map very well, and often do not map at all, on 
the Greek words (or words in any other ancient languages) that they 
are trying to translate. Nevertheless – and this is where we encounter 
the essential dilemma – we still cannot avoid using such terms as mind, 
spirit, soul, or the heart in our attempts to convey how Hermetic authors 
thought of the faculties for gaining access to higher salvational “knowl-
edge,” often referred to as gnōsis. In our efforts to reveal the meaning 
of ancient words, we have to resort to modern equivalents that in fact 
conceal their meaning; and yet we have no choice, because only through 
such acts of concealment can we hope to reveal at least something of the 
original.10
This basic dilemma has been known to translators throughout history 
and carries implications far more radical than is often realized. The truth 
is that once you enter the rabbit hole of translation in pursuit of just one 
single word, you find yourself in a wonderland of meaning where liter-
ally nothing is what it seems and there are no stable rules to hold on to.11 
David N. Wigtil has formulated the point with particular clarity:
[I]n translating, a person in effect rewrites a text entirely. The grammar and 
vocabulary of the original text are abandoned for an entirely different set of lin-
guistic structures, and the only control over this rewriting process is the idea or 
thought of the source.12
How radical the implications really are becomes clear when we ­realize 
that, logically, this “idea” or “thought” itself therefore cannot be 
translated. Somewhere between sender and receiver there appears a 
strange discontinuous gap or abyss, a liminal space of nothingness that 
we are routinely crossing all the time, without knowing how we do 
it. This gap is mysteriously bridged by “something” that cannot itself 
	 9	 On the general history of these interrelated concepts, see MacDonald, History of the 
Concept of Mind. Hans-Georg Gadamer remarks that, compared with the complex web 
of nuances (das Bedeutungsleben) of the spoken word, “a term is a paralyzed word, and 
terminological use of a word is an act of violence committed against speech,” a point that 
tends to be underestimated by modern interpreters of ancient texts (Hermeneutik I, 419).
	10	 See the paradox of hermeneutics frequently emphasized by Elliot R. Wolfson in his inter-
pretations of Jewish “mystical” texts, for instance Language, Eros, Being, 229: “… it 
must be said that the veil conceals the face it reveals by revealing the face it conceals. Lan-
guage is decidedly inadequate to mark the middle ground wherein concealing and reveal-
ing are identical in virtue of being different and different in virtue of being identical.”
	11	 For the classic treatment of this point, see Steiner, After Babel (with some mind-boggling 
examples on pp. 319–350).
	12	 Wigtil, “Incorrect Apocalyptic,” 2287 (my emphasis), cf. 2297.

Hermetic Spirituality
15
be put into language. Communication is therefore made possible only 
by “something” that itself cannot be communicated and, by defini-
tion, cannot even be understood. In short, translation presupposes the 
untranslatable.
Such reflections on linguistic relativism and their dazzling implica-
tions may be unavoidable to our postmodern minds but were of little 
or no concern to the authors of the Hermetica. They strongly believed 
in the metaphysical stability of meaning and the accessibility of truth, 
while insisting that ultimate meaning and truth could be found only 
beyond the sphere of thought and language.13 The Hermetica are full of 
statements to the effect that true knowledge of ultimate realities “that 
cannot be thought” is not just possible, but essential to human salvation 
and true felicity; and we will see that the pursuit of such “knowledge” 
is at the very heart of the ancient experiential practices that modern 
scholars refer to as “the Way of Hermes.”14 The human faculty of 
direct perception known as nous was believed to make such knowledge 
possible; but because this word was also used for normal ­thinking, as 
Festugière pointed out, the unfortunate result is that none of its transla-
tions will work in English – or, for that matter, in other modern lan-
guages.15 “Noetic perceptions” as understood in the Hermetica (and, 
as Festugière reminds us, in Platonism) are not the normal “intellec-
tual” or “mental” activities we commonly have in mind today but are 
claimed precisely to go beyond them. They have absolutely nothing to 
do with thinking, let alone with sensory perception. So here we have 
our first major reason why the true concern of the Hermetic writings 
is not with philosophy as commonly understood today.16 What their 
authors meant by “knowledge” is something entirely different from the 
	13	 On the radicality of this notion, see Van den Kerchove, “Notion of Truth.”
	14	 The notion of a “Way of Hermes” already appears in Iamblichus, Response to Porphyry 
VIII 5, and was placed at the center of attention by the two most influential modern 
scholars of the Hermetica, Jean-Pierre Mahé (“Voie d’immortalité”) and Garth Fowden 
(Egyptian Hermes, pt. II). It has now been widely adopted: see e.g. WHCH; Van den 
Kerchove, La voie; Bull, Tradition, 187–372; and discussion below, pp. 225–235.
	15	 Godel, “Socrate et Diotime,” 26 with note 58: “The Νοῦς is not the intellect but a prin-
ciple of lucidity superior to ordinary reason. This word is strictly untranslatable.”
	16	 Or, for that matter, as understood in antiquity. Socrates’ “love of wisdom,” as described 
by Plato, was likewise focused on an ultimate level of reality – the eternal forms or ideas – 
that could only be beheld directly in a trans-rational state of mania, divine madness (e.g. 
Phaedrus 249d; Symposium 210e-211b; cf. Ustinova, Divine Mania, 313–328). Philoso-
phers are those who have recognized their own ignorance and desire to become wise: 
therefore Plato’s ideal philosopher, Socrates, is precisely not the man of wisdom (Apology 
21b-e; Burkert, “Platon oder Pythagoras?”, 165–166, 172, 175; Hadot, “The Definition 

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
16
intellectual understanding achieved through mental activity – thinking – 
that our modern philosophical traditions have taught us to ­understand 
by that word.
Philosophy against Egypt
A second reason not to speak of Hermetic “philosophy” has less to do 
with the exact content of that term than with its polemical function in 
common academic and even in everyday discourse. Specialists have always 
been aware that the texts they labeled as “philosophical” might as well be 
described as “religious,” “theological,” “mystical,” or “theosophical.”17 
If they still preferred to speak of Hermetic philosophy, this was because 
it helped them draw a normative boundary. For them, the eminently seri-
ous and respectable pursuit of intellectual reflection about the nature of 
reality could have nothing in common with the so obviously disreputable 
and unserious business of magical or occult practice as reflected in many 
texts attributed to Hermes Trismegistus or associated with his name. The 
former type of activity deserved respect in their eyes, while the latter did 
not, and many scholars found it hard to imagine that one and the same 
text or author could be involved in both. Philosophers did not practice 
magic, for magicians were not thinking straight.
On a rather obvious level, this juxtaposition of respectable Hermetic 
philosophy against disreputable Hermetic practice seemed perfectly self-
evident to academic armchair intellectuals trained to value thinking as 
a noble pursuit and dismiss “occult” practices as embarrassing non-
sense.18 More specifically, it reflected the strong ideological allegiance 
of professional classicists to ancient Greece as the idealized home of 
rational thought, an attitude referred to as philhellenism or helleno-
philia and intimately linked to the liberal neo-humanist perspectives of 
of ‘Philosopher’,” in: What is Ancient Philosophy?, 46–49). By contrast, the ideal Her-
metic sage resembles Socrates’ teacher Diotima: a priestly visionary who no longer needs 
to aspire to knowledge because she knows the truth through direct experience (RHT II, 
30–31; cf. RHT IV, 79ff.; Fowden, Egyptian Hermes, 72; and below, pp. 187–194). For 
“philosophy” as a Hermetic self-designation, see Bull, Tradition, 380–383.
	17	 The first three are ubiquitous in the literature; for the last one, see e.g. Reitzenstein, 
Poimandres, 45; Windisch, “Urchristentum und Hermesmystik,” 186; RHT I, 13; RHT 
II, 32; Bickerman, Review of Festugière (1948), 457; Mahé, “Théorie et pratique,” 15; 
Moreschini, Dall’Asclepius, 9, 15 and passim; Dieleman, Priests, 1; HG, 17.
	18	 For the general history of the academic construction of “rejected knowledge,” of which this 
discourse is a part, see Hanegraaff, Esotericism and the Academy.

Hermetic Spirituality
17
nineteenth-century German Kulturprotestantismus.19 This stance was 
accompanied by profound feelings of suspicion, hostility, and contempt 
for anything reminiscent of its traditional competitor, that is to say of 
Egypt, the symbolic center of pagan idolatry, the primitive heart of irra-
tional darkness. That the Hermetica were Greek texts written in Egypt 
was an irritant to the scholarly imagination and made them an ideal arena 
of ideological contestation. Thus immediately after the German histo-
rian of ancient religions Richard Reitzenstein (1861–1931) placed the 
Hermetica on the agenda of academic research with a fundamental study 
published in 1904, the Polish classicist Tadeusz Zielinski (1859–1944) 
responded with great alarm to his suggestion that Greek “philosophical” 
texts might be rooted in Egyptian culture:
Reitzenstein’s chief error was that he completely obscured the distinction between 
higher and lower Hermetism. The lower type, which combines magic and alchemy 
and whose literature consists in the magical papyri and recipes of gold-making, 
has actually drawn from Egyptian sources, and could do so because it could use 
what was present. But the higher Hermetism … had no way of doing so. What is 
referred to as “Egyptian philosophy of religion” had to be incomprehensible to 
the Greek spirit and educated mind; for as the Hermetic mocker says,20 it really 
consists not of words (logoi) but of mere sounds (phōnai) that cannot even be 
translated into Greek.21
In other words, anything philosophical in the Hermetica must be Greek 
by definition, for even the very language of the Egyptians prevents them 
from understanding rational thought. Zielinski’s “higher Hermetism” 
stood for Greek philosophy, while its “lower” counterpart stood for 
Egyptian magic; the former was worthy of attention, the latter was not.
Reitzenstein’s blurring of these boundaries was experienced as a provo-
cation, and classicists responded by claiming the Hermetica for themselves – 
that is to say, for “Greece.” When Walter Scott (1855–1925) published 
the first volume of his problematic but influential English edition of the 
Hermetica, in 1924, he felt free to focus on the “religious or philosophic 
teachings” ascribed to Hermes Trismegistus while formally excising all 
those “masses of rubbish” concerned with “astrology, magic, alchemy, and 
kindred forms of pseudo-science.”22 During the first half of the twentieth 
century, as classicists won the Hermetic turf war, this distinction was widely 
	19	 Marchand, “From Liberalism to Neoromanticism”; see also Pingree, “Hellenophilia”; Burk-
ert, Orientalizing Revolution, 1–6. I will return to the general topic below, pp. 360–363.
	20	 A reference to CH XVI 2 (see below, p. 116).
	21	 Zielinski, “Hermes und die Hermetik II,” 27 (emphasis in original).
	22	 Scott I, 1.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
18
accepted as normative and self-evident. Festugière, in his ­four-volume 
standard work published between 1942 and 1954, spoke of a “popular” 
Hermetism as opposed to its “learned philosophical” counterpart, devot-
ing one volume to the former and three to the latter. His standard edi-
tion of the Hermetica, published in collaboration with Arthur Darby Nock 
(1902–1963) in 1946 and 1954, was limited to the “philosophical” texts. 
No comprehensive study or textual edition of the “popular” Hermetica has 
been published after Festugière’s first volume of 1942.23
From the 1970s, the pro-Greek/anti-Egyptian ideology was gradu-
ally weakened and finally abandoned, due partly to the discovery of new 
Hermetic manuscripts in Coptic and other ancient languages and partly 
to a slow decline of philhellenic bias in the study of ancient religions 
more generally. To both phenomena we will return. For our present con-
cerns, the important point is that these developments did not lead schol-
ars to abandon the basic distinction between two types of Hermetica.24 
Only the terminology was adapted somewhat: in the wake of Jean-Pierre 
Mahé’s seminal publications of the 1970s and 1980s, most scholars now 
refer to the astrological, magical, and alchemical materials ascribed to 
Hermes as “practical” or “technical” Hermetica.25 Their counterpart is 
usually still referred to as “theoretical” or “philosophical” even by schol-
ars who are quick to point out that those adjectives are inadequate.26
Why does this matter so much? Because of the power that language 
exerts over our minds. The terminologies we choose will not just color 
and influence our interpretations, but often determine which other texts, 
practices, ideas, or traditions will be seen as most relevant for under-
standing what the Hermetica are all about.27 If we call them “philosoph-
ical” we will try to analyze their philosophy and compare them with 
other philosophical traditions, and if we call them “theoretical” we will 
be looking for theories and systematic speculation. In both cases, this 
will lead us to relativize, minimize, marginalize, or even wholly overlook 
dimensions that may be important or even central to the texts themselves 
but are hard to understand in terms of philosophical theories. By and 
large, as will be seen, this is exactly what happened in the study of the 
	23	 Christian Bull is now working on a study that should fill this gap.
	24	 See for instance Fowden, Egyptian Hermes, 1–11; Cop, xxxii–xl; Van den Kerchove, La 
voie, 1 and passim; HG, 16–26.
	25	 HHE II, 22: “In what follows, to the theoretical or philosophical writings of Trismegis-
tus we will therefore oppose his technical or practical works.”
	26	 For instance HHE II, 290–291; Van den Kerchove, La voie, 1; HG, 16–18.
	27	 For this essential point, see Bull, “Ancient Hermetism,” 126.

Hermetic Spirituality
19
Hermetica. By speaking of “Hermetic spirituality,” I hope to highlight 
precisely those dimensions that philosophers (and, for that matter, theo-
logians28) have always found most difficult to handle but which are cen-
tral to the study of religion: experiences and practices.
The Spiritual Turn
In a seminal study published in 2012, Anna Van den Kerchove approaches 
the so-called “philosophical” Hermetica from a perspective inspired by 
Pierre Hadot,29 known for his influential thesis that ancient philoso-
phy was not so much a theoretical pursuit as a “way of life” grounded 
in “spiritual exercises.”30 If we scan the scholarly literature about the 
Hermetica, from Reitzenstein to the present, we may be surprised to dis-
cover how frequently the words spiritual and spirituality have in fact 
been used, although rarely in a systematic manner.31 The terminology is 
even quasi-omnipresent in Garth Fowden’s ground-breaking study The 
Egyptian Hermes (1986), which closes with a sentence that could hardly 
be more explicit: “At heart [Hermetism] was a spiritual way, the way of 
Hermetic gnōsis – a means to an end immune from the scrutiny of phi-
lologist, philosopher and historian alike.”32
Yet Fowden never explained what he meant by Hermetic ­spirituality – 
he seemed to take the term for granted. If we wish to define it more 
	28	 For theological agendas in the study of Hermetism, see below, pp. 80–82, 171–174, 362–363. 
Marchand summarizes the key conflict with reference to Reitzenstein, whose “principle her-
esy in the eyes of liberal theologians was that he had given Christianity an irrational, oriental 
origin, not a rational Greek one, as had Harnack several decades earlier” (“From Liberalism 
to Neoromanticism,” 158).
	29	 Van den Kerchove, La voie, 1, 129; cf. Van den Kerchove, “Visions et légitimation,” 794 
note 2.
	30	 Hadot, Exercices spirituels; Hadot, What is Ancient Philosophy?
	31	 For instance Bousset, Review of Kroll (Frömmigkeit), 700; Grant, Review of Nock/
Festugière, 58; RHT IV, 139; van Moorsel, Mysteries (“spiritualization”); Podemann 
Sørensen, “Ancient Egyptian Religious Thought,” 41–42; Fowden, “Late Antique 
Paganism,” 181–182; Fowden, Egyptian Hermes, passim; Mahé, “Introduction” in: 
WHDH, 101–106; Kingsley, “Introduction,” 24; Fraser, “Baptised in Gnôsis,” 33–34; 
Van den Kerchove, La voie, passim; Bull, “Notion of Mysteries,” 401; Bull, “Wicked 
Angels,” 27; Bull, “No End to Sacrifice,” 144–145; Bull, Tradition, passim.
	32	 Fowden, Egyptian Hermes, 215. Scholars of the Hermetica have a way of admitting 
their limitations at the very end of their books. After 1700 dense pages of analysis, these 
were Festugière’s final remarks about CH XIII: “It is an ecstasy … How much illusion 
may be mixed up in it? We do not know. … It is beyond the domain of reason. … [I]t is 
expressed in a language about which there is nothing abstract or theoretical, but which 
carries the imprint of lived experience. … Is it mysticism? The historian knows only 
what he is being told. He does not penetrate the secret of the heart” (RHT IV, 267).

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
20
precisely, my previous discussion should have made sufficiently clear that 
it cannot possibly convey the exact original meaning of ancient terms 
such as pneuma, nous, their cognates, or any of their Greek, Coptic, 
Armenian, Syriac, or Latin equivalents.33 The Latin term spiritualitas 
seems to have made its first appearance in the fifth century ce, against a 
background of Christian theological understandings of spiritus and spiri-
tualis (translating pneuma and pneumatikos in the letters of Paul, about 
the “way of the spirit” against “the way of the flesh”). During its some-
what complicated evolution through the middle ages, the term began to 
appear in French and English vernaculars, but then declined during the 
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. It made a strong comeback in apolo-
getic arguments for the superiority of Hinduism over “Western material-
ism” in an English colonial context as well as in French circles of Roman 
Catholic theology (very much those of Father Festugière) during the 
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.34 After World War II, and 
increasingly since the 1960s and 1970s, this led to a complex and confus-
ing popular discourse in which the term “spirituality” is widely used but 
almost never defined. As we have just seen, even modern scholars with 
deep linguistic training such as Fowden, Hadot, and Van den Kerchove 
feel at liberty to use this modern coinage in discussing traditions of late 
antiquity where the term did not yet exist. I am taking the extra step of 
making this terminology explicit and assigning it a central role in inter-
preting the nature of the Hermetica.
Based on extensive empirical research of what the term “spirituality” 
actually means in contemporary discourse, the sociologists Heinz Streib 
and Ralph W. Hood conclude that it can be defined with sufficient preci-
sion as “privatized, experience-oriented religion.”35 This means that it can 
be applied to currents and traditions which (1) are considered religious36 
rather than rational or scientific, (2) have a focus on direct experience 
	33	 On the limits of translation, see Ashton, “Translating Philosophie,” 16–17 (followed by 
some excellent illustrations, including Kant’s Verstand or Hegel’s term aufheben, “the 
despair of translators”); Steiner, After Babel, 255 (with many elaborate illustrations 
throughout the book).
	34	 Principe, “Toward Defining Spirituality,” 130–133; Schmidt, Restless Souls, 1–23.
	35	 Streib and Hood, “‘Spirituality’”; Streib and Hood, Semantics and Psychology of 
Spirituality.
	36	 Streib and Hood argue at length that “spirituality” should be understood as a subcat-
egory of “religion,” not as a separate genus (“‘Spirituality’,” 448–449). It follows that 
the latter concept should not, along Durkheimian lines, be limited to social formations 
alone. For my take on “religion” as a theoretical concept, see Hanegraaff, “Defining 
Religion” and “Reconstructing ‘Religion’.”

Hermetic Spirituality
21
rather than on doctrine or belief, and (3) are concerned with the culti-
vation of private individual practice rather than with membership of a 
social organization. With respect to our topic, of course this does not 
mean that in the Hermetica we encounter no rational or scientific ele-
ments, no doctrines and beliefs, and no forms of social organization – far 
from it. Rather, the argument is that their primary focus is not on those 
particular dimensions but on practices for the cultivation of private indi-
vidual experiences. Their purpose, as will be seen, was to heal the soul 
from its afflictions and restore the human spirit to its original condition 
of wholeness, divine consciousness, omniscience, even omnipotence.
If Hermetic spirituality was a type of privatized, experience-oriented 
religion, this has consequences for conventional ways of categorizing the 
materials. By and large, most of the texts that used to be called “phil-
osophical” remain relevant, but their theoretical discussions about the 
exact nature of God, humanity, and the cosmos must be considered from 
the perspective of their function in a wider spiritual framework: they do 
not stand on themselves, as contributions to philosophical debate, but 
are meant to provide background information that spiritual practitioners 
need while navigating their journey of healing and salvation. As for the 
corpus that used to be called “technical,” we will see that it contains 
some texts that are of great importance to Hermetic spirituality, while 
many other texts concerned with practical astrology, magic, alchemy, or 
philosophy have little or no relevance to it.
I need to emphasize that my approach does not imply a mere reshuf-
fling of the texts according to a somewhat different principle of division, 
replacing the traditional framework of “philosophical versus technical 
Hermetica” by one of “spiritual versus non-spiritual Hermetica.” I ask 
my readers to visualize the situation not in terms of two separate blocks 
at all, but as one single field of texts and ideas arranged in a circular 
manner around a center.37 The spiritual Way of Hermes forms the heart 
of this circle (at the very center of which we might wish to imagine a 
dot, to indicate the nondimensional point of utter transcendence where 
words fail and only silence remains), while at its outer periphery we find 
Hermetic materials with little or no relevance to it. The chief criterion for 
where any specific text must be located might be determined statistically: 
as we move gradually from the periphery to the center, we will find that 
certain texts (notably CH I, CH XIII, and NH VI6) move increasingly to 
the forefront of attention because they are quoted ever more frequently, 
	37	 See below, Chapter 5, pp. 140–144.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
22
while others recede into the background because they have little or noth-
ing to say about the spiritual quest. One further important implication 
of my approach is that on our way toward the center, we will encounter 
some texts and authors (notably Zosimos of Panopolis and Iamblichus 
of Chalcis) who are seldom included in the corpus of Hermetic materials 
but happen to be far more important to Hermetic spirituality than some 
standard components of that corpus.
After these introductory reflections, it is now time to approach the 
texts and traditions concerned with Hermetic spirituality. To do so, we 
need to travel far back in time and venture deep into the heart of dark-
ness itself: the country of Egypt during Roman times.

23
But there was in it one river especially, a mighty big river, that 
you could see on the map, resembling an immense snake uncoiled, 
with its head in the sea, its body at rest curving afar over a 
vast country, and its tail lost in the depths of the land.
Joseph Conrad1
Sailing south from Athens or Rome, then turning east and southwards 
again, travelers during the Roman Era would reach the delta of the 
Nile – the largest river of the known world. Arriving in the harbor city of 
Alexandria, they would easily feel at home in the hustle and bustle of this 
great cosmopolitan center where Greek was the common language for 
commerce and intellectual exchange. In fact, native Egyptians formed a 
minority here, eclipsed by a majority population of Greeks and Jews.2 The 
city was known as Alexandria ad Aegyptum, “Alexandria near Egypt,” 
for this was not supposed to be an Egyptian city at all, but a Greek one 
planted on foreign soil.3 Reaching a total population of about half a mil-
lion or more,4 Alexandria was the greatest of the provincial capitals in 
2
Heart of Darkness
	1	 Conrad, Heart of Darkness, 22.
	2	 Delia, “Population of Roman Alexandria” (on the large Jewish population until 117 ce, 
see Harker, “Jews in Roman Egypt”); but note that all non-citizens of the country were 
classified by the Romans as “Egyptians” regardless of ethnic origin (Jördens, “Status 
and Citizenship,” 254; Vandorpe, “Identity,” 263). For the many ethnicities in Alexan-
dria, see Venit, “Alexandria,” 104. Among literally thousands of temples and shrines, 
those devoted to Egyptian deities were mostly relegated to the fringes of the city (ibid., 
110–111). Cf. Watts, Hypatia, 9: “roughly one temple for every twenty houses.”
	3	 MacMullen, “Nationalism in Roman Egypt,” 187.
	4	 Delia, “Population”; cf. Watts, Hypatia, 7–19, here 15.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
24
the Roman Empire, and scholars have long seen it as the “­crucible” from 
which Hermetism was born.5
But was it? If one of our Greek or Roman travelers would be adven-
turous enough to sail further south, perhaps with an interest in the cult 
of Hermes Trismegistus, he might begin to wonder. Traveling from 
Alexandria southwards along the Nile, he would be moving towards the 
region that is known as Upper Egypt (to the frequent confusion of mod-
ern map-gazers who think that north means up and south means down). 
Already at his arrival in Memphis, towards the bottom of the Nile delta, 
he would find himself in a country that breathed a different atmosphere. 
As a foreigner coming from Alexandria, he might find himself eyed with 
suspicion if not hostility by native inhabitants who thought of themselves 
as the “real Egyptians” in opposition to the Hellenized “Alexandrians” 
who had taken over their land. The capital city and the Egyptian prov-
ince were practically two separate countries with different civilizations, 
and Alexandria and Memphis have been described as “culturally anti-
thetical cities.”6 In short, the sense of leaving Hellenic civilization behind 
would grow ever more strongly on our traveler’s mind as he ventured 
further south.
Next he would pass through the Tomis canal, which the Muslims 
would later call Bahr Yusuf, “the waterway of Joseph,” that connects the 
Nile Valley to a large oasis known as the Fayyum area today. Its major city 
was Shedet, referred to as City of Crocodiles by the Greeks. Somewhere 
around here, a popular movement of devotion to the deified Pharaoh 
Amenemhet III, known as Poremanres or Porramanres, may well have 
sown the earliest seeds of the Hermetic tradition.7 Having traveled ­further 
past Oxyrhynchus, our traveler would arrive in Khemenu (Hmnw, “City 
of the Eight”8), known to Romans by the name of Hermopolis Magna – 
“the Great City of Hermes.” This was a substantial urban community 
	5	 As recently as 2005, van den Broek could still speak of a “general consensus” on this 
point (“Hermetism,” 567). For a short summary of arguments for the contrary position, 
adopted in this chapter and this book, see Bull, “Ancient Hermetism and Esotericism,” 
116–117; Bull, Tradition, 454; cf. the more general remarks by Frankfurter, “Religious 
Practice and Piety,” 329–330.
	6	 Fowden, Egyptian Hermes, 20, referring to MacMullen, “Nationalism,” 183–184 and cf. 
187–188. In speaking of “cities” to cover both poleis and metropoleis I follow Tacoma, 
“Settlement and Population,” 124.
	7	 Jackson, “New Proposal,” 104–105; Bull, Tradition, 121–131, 452; see below, pp. 265–266. 
Amenemhet III reigned during the twelfth dynasty (Middle Kingdom).
	8	 Fowden, Egyptian Hermes, 174.

Heart of Darkness
25
with a population that may have come close to 50,000.9 Its name referred 
to its status as the center of the Egyptian cult of Thoth, the powerful ibis-
headed deity associated with Hermes by the Greeks.10 As late as the early 
fourth century, priests in the city referred to Thrice-Greatest Hermes as 
their ancestral god and protector, and a stone-paved processional way 
towards the temple carried his name.11
Traveling further south and venturing ever deeper into Upper Egypt, 
our traveler would pass by the city of Akhmīm, called Panopolis in 
Greek. We know it as the birthplace of the alchemist Zosimos, who like 
his associate and protégée Theosebeia seems to have participated in a 
milieu of Hermetic devotees – probably in Akhmīm itself and perhaps 
elsewhere as well.12 Around the middle of the third century, a votive 
inscription was set up here for “the great god Hermes Trismegistus.”13 
Around this same time, in a bend of the Nile further south from 
Akhmīm, Christian ascetics had begun clustering together around a 
place called Chēnoboskion. Many of them were looking for visionary 
experiences, and it appears that this interest led them to translate some 
Greek Hermetic manuscripts into Coptic, not so very long after our 
imaginary traveler came sailing by.14 Nobody could know that in some 
unimaginable future, about sixteen centuries later, the place would 
become famous under its new name Nag Hammadi. When these Coptic 
	 9	 Matthews, Journey of Theophanes, 14 with note 6; Bagnall, Egypt in Late Antiquity, 53.
	10	 On Hermopolis, see Matthews, Journey, 12–20; Bull, “Hermes between Pagans and 
Christians,” 214–216. On Thoth, see e.g. Fowden, Egyptian Hermes, 22–23.
	11	 Letter of Anatolios, an inhabitant of Hermopolis who was active in the cult of Thoth and 
refers to himself as “chief prophet,” in a letter addressed to a friend in Alexandria whom 
he calls “the all-wise Ambrosios … the champion of the wisdom of the Hellenes and one 
who is pleasing and well-disposed to us” (P. Herm. Rees 3, John Rylands Library, Man-
chester; translation in Matthews, Journey, 22). See also Fowden, Egyptian Hermes, 175–
176, with further reference to two other letters from the same archive and a letter from 
the Hermopolis city council that invokes “our ancestral god Hermes Trismegistus, who 
stands by you everywhere”; same material discussed in Bull, “Hermes between Pagans 
and Christians,” 214–215, with references for the stone-paved temple road in note 40 
(cf. Bailey, “Classical Architecture,” 194). The so-called Strasbourg Cosmogony in which 
Hermes creates the world (Page, Select Papyri, vol. 3, 544–550) seems to have come from 
Hermopolis, but its Hermes is clearly the Greek one. See also Kingsley, “Poimandres,” 56.
	12	 Fowden, Egyptian Hermes, 125, 173–174, 188; Bull, “Hermes between Pagans and 
Christians,” 218–225; Mertens, “Alchemy, Hermetism and Gnosticism at Panopolis.”
	13	 Dittenberger, Orientis Graeci Inscriptiones, vol. 2, 454–455 (nr. 716); Mertens, 
“Alchemy, Hermetism and Gnosticism,” 172 note 43; Bull, “Hermes between Pagans 
and Christians,” 218.
	14	 Bull, “Visionary Experiences,” 183–184; Lundhaug and Jenott, Monastic Origins of the 
Nag Hammadi Codices.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
26
Hermetic papyri were discovered in a nearby desert cave in 1945, as 
part of a much larger collection of heretical Christian texts, they caused 
a scholarly sensation.15 Eventually they would revolutionize our under-
standing of Hermetic spirituality.
Finally, after turning another great bend in the river and heading 
south again, our traveler would reach Thebes, the extremely ancient 
Egyptian city Waset, referred to as Diospolis Magna by the Greeks 
and Romans but known as Luxor today. More than 3,000 years old 
at that time, the residence of the Pharaohs during the period of the 
New Kingdom (sixteenth-eleventh centuries bce) when Egypt was at 
the peak of its power, this city of the god Amun could be considered 
the heart of ancient Egypt. It is not surprising that in the centuries 
after the conquest of Egypt by Alexander, Thebes had emerged as a 
center of resistance against Greek and Roman rule. Having arrived in 
Thebes, our traveler could still sail farther south along the Nile, but in 
a real sense he could not get more distant from Alexandria, the cos-
mopolitical center of Greek Hellenism. This was the ancient heartland 
of Egyptian religion,16 and it is here that we begin our search for the 
Hermetic tradition.
Thessalos in Thebes
At some time probably during the first half of the second century ce, a real 
traveler is said to have arrived in Thebes. His name was Thessalos and 
he had come from Asia Minor “with plenty of silver” to study medicine 
in Alexandria.17 In the cosmopolitan world of Graeco-Roman antiquity, 
countless upwardly mobile young men were traveling restlessly – quite 
like university students in our own globalized world – in search of a good 
	15	 The news was first announced by Jean Doresse: see notably Doresse and Mina, “Nou-
veaux textes gnostiques coptes” (1948); Puech and Doresse, “Nouveaux écrits gnos-
tiques” (1949).
	16	 Fowden, Egyptian Hermes, 168–176; Moyer, “Thessalos,” 45; Bull, “Hermes between 
Pagans and Christians,” 225–230; Łajtar, “Theban Region.”
	17	 On the phenomenon of spiritual tourism to Egypt, see Frankfurter, Religion in Roman 
Egypt, 166–167, 217–221; about the standard route, see Dieleman, Priests, 252 with 
note 161. On Thessalos, see Cumont, “Écrits hermétiques II”; Festugière, “L’expérience 
religieuse”; Festugière, Hermétisme, 141–181; RHT I, 56–58; Friedrich, Thessalos von 
Tralles; Smith, “The Temple and the Magician”; Fowden, Egyptian Hermes, 162–165; 
Ritner, “Egyptian Magical Practice,” 3356–3358; Moyer, “Thessalos”; Harland, “Jour-
neys”; Moyer, Egypt and the Limits of Hellenism, 208–273, 287–292. On the dating of 
the text (between 75 and 200, probably between 100 and 150 ce), see ibid., 217–219.

Heart of Darkness
27
education.18 Thessalos, an ambitious student given to ­exaggerating his 
own talents and achievements, was a typical example. Having almost 
finished his studies in Alexandria and getting ready to return home, one 
fateful day he came across a book about the medical virtues of stones and 
plants attributed to Nechepso. This legendary Egyptian king and astrol-
oger had been receiving revelatory epistles from the sage Petosiris and 
claimed superior knowledge about astrological plant medicine,19 ­allegedly 
due to ecstatic visions and revelations from Hermes and Asclepius.20 The 
treatise made such an impression on Thessalos that even before trying 
out the prescriptions, he was already bragging to his family and fellow 
students about his incredible medical breakthrough.
But to his enormous distress, the prescriptions proved worthless. 
This debacle exposed him to scorn and ridicule from his peers, and so 
­humiliating was the experience that he no longer dared return home. So 
he started wandering around Egypt, “driven by a sting in my soul and 
­seeking to deliver on some aspect of my rash promise.”21 He would rather 
commit suicide, he was telling himself, than return home as a loser. He 
clearly needed help.
My soul always foretold me that I would speak with the gods, and so I kept 
stretching out my hands to heaven, praying to the gods to grant me some favour 
through a dream vision or the spirit of a god, so that I could proudly and as a 
happy person return to Alexandria and to my homeland.22
Having arrived in Thebes (Diospolis), Thessalos began hanging out with 
the elders and priests connected to the temples, hoping for a break. To 
get a proper view of what happened next, we need to understand how 
	18	 Fowden, Egyptian Hermes, 162–163; cf. Smith, “Temple,” 175.
	19	 On Nechepsos and Petosiris, see Ryholt, “New Light”; Heilen, “Some Metrical Frag-
ments.” On their relevance to Thessalos, see Smith, “Temple,” 177, 183–185, with ref-
erence to Riess, Nechepsonis et Petosiridis fragmenta magica, fr 1 and 33; and Moyer, 
Egypt, 228–248.
	20	 With reference to Pap. Louvre 2342 bis (Ryholt, “New Light,” 71). Hermes and Ascle-
pius can perhaps be identified in this case with Amenhotep son of Hapu and Imouthes 
son of Hephaistos (Imhotep) (ibid., referring to “Hermes the Theban” and “Asclepius 
the Memphite” in Clement, Strom. I 21 and Cyril, Contra Julianum VI 812; Heilen, 
“Some Metrical Fragments,” 30, 52; but see Bull, Tradition, 165–167, with reference 
to Firmicus Maternus, Matheseos Libri VIII 3, proem 1-1.1) On the ecstatic experience 
of the soul “walking in heaven” or “entering the sky” while the body remains on earth, 
and its relevance to the Hermetica (notably CH I 1, 4; CH X 25) and Egyptian temple 
rituals, see Heilen (“Some Metrical Fragments,” 37–43) and Bull (Tradition, 170–174), 
both with reference to a passage in Vettius Valens.
	21	 Thessalos, De virtute herbarum, Proem 10 (Friedrich ed., 49–50).
	22	 Ibid, 11.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
28
radically life had changed for religious functionaries in Upper Egypt since 
the beginning of the Roman Empire.
The country had been under foreign control since the conquests of 
Alexander, who at his death in 323 bce had been succeeded by his 
general Ptolemy I Soter.23 The Ptolemaic dynasty would rule Egypt 
for almost 300 years, until the death of Cleopatra VII and the Roman 
conquest under Octavian, the future emperor Augustus, in 30 bce. 
During this long period, the Greek intellectual culture emanating from 
Alexandria had deeply penetrated Egyptian society, especially among 
the wealthier and more highly educated strata of society. This cultural 
milieu of Egyptian Hellenism continued under the Roman Empire, 
but now the country was subjected to a political regime of unprec-
edented severity, inspired partly by Octavian’s personal animosity to all 
things Egyptian and partly by its economic importance as the “­imperial 
­granary” responsible for about one third of Rome’s annual grain sup-
ply.24 For members of the priestly class, the results of these changes 
were dramatic. They had been enjoying great wealth and ­authority dur-
ing the Ptolemaic period, when the sacerdotal elites had been actively 
involved in the economic and political life of the kingdom and its 
high priests had been ruling almost like medieval popes.25 But after 
the Roman conquest, quite suddenly they found themselves deprived 
of power, prestige, and economic revenue, as eloquently explained by 
Robert K. Ritner:
[After 23 bce] temple matters were subject to the secular authority of the imperial 
“private account.” By the reign of Hadrian (117–138 ce), religious authority was 
centralized under an appointed civil bureaucrat of equestrian rank … Priesthoods 
were reduced in number, temple holdings were decreased, and the civil bureau-
cracy now monitored the order and tenure of the hierarchy, their duties, dress 
and personal finances. Higher clergy were forbidden to engage in any financial 
activities outside their designated religious duties. All priests were required to 
wear linen (but never wool) and to be circumcised, unblemished and, subject to a 
1,000-drachma fine, shaven bald. … Admission to the priestly caste now required 
official certification before the provincial administrator … In return for such 
social isolation, the temple hierarchy was provided with a government subven-
tion (syntaxis), and the upper echelons were exempt from taxation and compul-
sory public service. From these Roman restrictions derives the later stereotyped 
	23	 For the political history of Egypt under the Ptolemies, see short overview in Chauveau, 
Egypt in the Age of Cleopatra, 6–28.
	24	 Ritner, “Egypt under Roman Rule,” 1–2, 6; for the Roman annexation of Egypt, see 
overview in Herklotz, “Aegypto Capta.”
	25	 Ritner, “Egypt under Roman Rule,” 4–7.

Heart of Darkness
29
image of cloistered, ascetic Egyptian priests, devoted to purity and contemplation 
and “enduring hunger and thirst and paucity of food during their whole life.”26
So those are the priests that Thessalos would have met in Thebes. They 
were aged, impoverished, socially isolated men, humiliated and demoral-
ized by the decline of their ancient traditions and undoubtedly resentful 
of the foreign powers responsible for destroying their ancestral traditions 
and their way of life. Practicing the ancient rituals in temple complexes 
that had been falling into disrepair for centuries, their personal power 
and authority had been reduced entirely to the spiritual realm.
The priests seemed friendly enough to Thessalos, but withdrew in 
indignation when he inquired about magic.27 Just one of them did not 
turn away but mentioned that he knew the procedure for seeing visions in 
a bowl of water. So Thessalos invited him for a walk. Having found a sol-
itary place, he suddenly threw himself on the ground crying, clinging to 
the priest’s feet and imploring his help. His very soul was in his hands, for 
he absolutely had to see a god or otherwise would kill himself! Whether 
impressed or alarmed by this emotional outburst, the priest promised 
to help him. Having “kept himself pure” for three days, through fast-
ing and abstinence, at dawn after the third day Thessalos was led to a 
“pure room” – possibly in a known sanctuary at Deir el-Bahri that had 
dark chambers for incubation rites associated with Imhotep (Asclepius) 
and Amenhotep son of Hapu (possibly linked to Hermes), or perhaps a 
	26	 Ritner, “Egypt under Roman Rule,” 7–8 (I have changed a few sentences from present 
to past tense in the interest of readability); and similar overviews in Dieleman, Priests, 
208–211; Moyer, Egypt, 270–273; Bagnall, Egypt, 261–268; Assmann and Frankfurter, 
“Egypt,” 160–162. The “private account” (idios logos) refers to a set of regulations 
established by the deified Augustus, see Ritner, “Egypt under Roman Rule,” 5. The clos-
ing quotation is taken from Chaeremon, fragm. 10.7 = Porphyry, De Abstinentia IV 6–8 
(van der Horst, Chaeremon, 21). On these general developments, see also Frankfurter, 
Religion in Roman Egypt, 27–30, 198ff., 219 (with a programmatic emphasis on the 
priesthood’s “persistence and resilience” under adverse circumstances). On the decay of 
the temples, see for instance Smith, “Temple and the Magician,” 178 note 30, with refer-
ence to the classic description by Strabo, Geography XVII.1.27–29; Matthews, Journey 
of Theophanes, 18–19.
	27	 Harland (“Journeys,” 125) translates εἴ τι τῆς μαγικῆς ἐνεργείας σῴζεται (Thessalos, De 
virtute herbarum, Proem 10; Friedrich ed., 49–50) as “whether any magical power saves 
a person from illness”; but since the use of mageia for medical purposes was uncon-
troversial for Egyptian priests, Korshi Dosoo suggests sticking to the earlier standard 
translation (cf. RHT I, 58; Moyer, Egypt and the Limits, 57; Bull, Tradition, 409 with 
note 49) “whether some magical power [or energy] was preserved” (Dosoo personal 
communication, referring to the almost identical construction εἰ δὲ ὅλως μέρος τι τοῦ 
ἔργου σῴζεται in Epiphanius’ Panarion 1.312.15). On the term “magic” in this specific 
context, see Otto, Magie, 376–378, and below, pp. 42–44.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
30
smaller temple at present-day Qasr el-‘Aguz, devoted to the same ­deities.28 
When the priest inquired whether he wanted to see a dead soul or a 
god, Thessalos answered that he wished to speak with no one less than 
Asclepius himself – face to face and alone.29 Although visibly displeased, 
the priest complied. He told him to sit down opposite the “throne” on 
which the god would appear, pronounced the ineffable names that would 
summon the god, then left the room and shut the door.
What followed is known as a ritual of apparition.30 Asclepius appeared 
right in front of Thessalos. The god’s facial expression and the beauty of 
his surroundings were so wondrous that he writes he cannot describe 
them, but felt that the spectacle “released him from body and soul.”31 
The god reached out his hand, and after some flattering remarks about 
Thessalos’ greatness and future success, offered to answer any questions 
he might want to ask. Struggling to gather himself together, Thessalos 
managed to ask why Nechepso’s prescriptions had failed, and Asclepius 
proceeded to instruct him about the true way of using the powers of 
plants. The rest of the text is a technical treatise about astrological 
plant medicine. Having finished his discourse, Asclepius ascended and 
Thessalos went looking for the priest.32 According to some of the Latin 
	28	 Here I follow Bull’s argument concerning the probable meaning of οἶκος καθαρός (Tra-
dition, 427 note 3) and David Klotz’s suggestion as for its probable location at Deir 
el-Bahari (Caesar in the City of Amun, 25–28, accepted by Moyer, Egypt, 250–251, 
who also mentions Qasr el-‘Aguz, and by Bull, Tradition, 427); however, Dosoo tends 
towards interpreting οἶκος καθαρός in terms of a private dwelling (“Rituals of Appari-
tion,” 213, 311, 378–381). Purity was “the essential element of a temple” (Dieleman, 
Priests, 211–213; Sauneron, Priests, 35–42). For the identification of Amenhotep son of 
Hapu as Hermes, see above, note 20.
	29	 Here and elsewhere, my reconstruction is based on the only surviving Greek manuscript 
(Codex Matritensis, Paris BN 4631). Concerning the formulation μόνος πρὸς μόνον, 
which has no equivalent in the Latin versions: contrary to Smith’s suggestion (“Temple,” 
180–181 with note 40), Peterson rejects the idea of a neoplatonic “theurgic” interpreta-
tion and shows that Thessalos simply wanted to be left alone (“Herkunft und Bedeu-
tung,” 35–37).
	30	 Dosoo, “Rituals of Apparition.” Moyer speaks more specifically of an ph.-nt-r or “god’s 
arrival” ritual (“Thessalos,” 48–49; Egypt, 252; cf. Ritner, “Egyptian Magical Prac-
tice,” 3346); on this important category in the Theban Magical Library, see Dosoo, 
ibid., 241–252, who concludes that in the context of the Theban Magical Library the 
term refers to a dream oracle.
	31	 Thessalos, De virtute herbarum, Proem 24.
	32	 At least according to the Greek version and the Latin manuscript M: see Friedrich, Thes-
salos, 17–18, 21–22; Moyer, Egypt, 263 with note 220. Thessalos’ claim of “receiving 
money sufficient for myself” (recipiens auro mihi sufficiens) remains mysterious, as it is 
hard to see why the priest would give Thessalos money, especially since the ritual had 
been a success (cf. Dosoo, “Rituals,” 315 note 1315).

Heart of Darkness
31
manuscripts, they ended up traveling to Alexandria together, where 
Thessalos tested the prescriptions “within the space of one year” and 
finally succeeded in convincing all the sceptics.33
Rituals of apparition – in which a god appears to a practitioner to 
answer his questions, bestow favors, or establish an ongoing relation-
ship – are extremely frequent in the large manuscript collection known as 
the “Theban Magical Library.”34 Such rituals typically required a period 
of purification to prepare the practitioner for his encounter with the 
god, a burnt offering (often just the smoking of incense), and a spoken 
formula.35 Many of these materials remain incomprehensible unless we 
assume that far from being mere “literary fictions,” they reflect practices 
that actually took place in Egyptian temple contexts and could result in 
spectacular visions. Before zooming in on the specific phenomenon of 
Hermetic spirituality, we need to look at this wider context of Egyptian 
ritual and visionary practice during the Roman period and ask ourselves 
how it may have worked.
The Light of the Godhead
The story of Thessalos provides us with an excellent point of entry. Of 
course we cannot know for sure where his narrative should be placed 
on a scale between pure fiction and literal autobiography, but we may 
assume it is somewhere in between. Thessalos was in trouble and must 
have decided that he had to come up with a new treatise on plant astrol-
ogy. Still based on the original Nechepso text, the crucial difference was 
that it would provide exact technical details concerning the astrological 
times the plants had to be harvested.36 If he wanted to overwrite the 
shameful memory of his Alexandrian debacle, this time it really had to 
work. Since Thessalos’ personal reputation was in shatters, he needed to 
attribute his treatise to an authority high enough to correct Nechepso. 
Who could be more suitable than the god of healing himself, and what 
	33	 For the relevant passages with English translation, see Moyer, Egypt, 263–264 note 222.
	34	 Dosoo, “Rituals of Apparition,” 221–222; cf. Dieleman, “Coping,” esp. 354–356. 
On the Theban Magical Library and its importance, see Fowden, Egyptian Hermes, 
168–173; Ritner, “Egyptian Magical Practice,” 3335; Dieleman, Priests, 11–23; Dosoo, 
“History”; Dosoo, “Rituals of Apparition.” On the high probability that the collec-
tion really does come from Thebes, see the careful argumentation in Dosoo, “History,” 
253–254 with note 11; and for proof focused on the Leiden I 384 and London-Leiden 
papyri (PGM XII/PDM xii and PGM XIV/PDM xiv), see Dieleman, Priests, 21, 40–44.
	35	 Dosoo, “Rituals of Apparition,” 222.
	36	 Moyer, Egypt, 229 (hence the “space of one year” that he needed in Alexandria, see above).

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
32
better place to meet him than a temple in Thebes? Whether the author of 
our text ever sat in a closed chamber gazing at an apparition is impossible 
for us to determine, but it is important to consider all the possibilities. 
Perhaps he just took his description from the abundant oral and written 
record of divine epiphanies, because he needed it for his story. Perhaps 
he did participate in the ritual, but it failed, and so he ended up describ-
ing what should have happened. But then again, perhaps he did see the 
god, and the god spoke to him. How can we reasonably account for that 
possibility?
Consider the situation. Thessalos needed an apparition, and the priest 
could provide it. Did he expect nothing in return for his services? That 
is unlikely. By accepting Thessalos’ request, he could get into serious 
trouble with his colleagues, for what happened inside the temples was 
supposed to be secret, and “Asiatics” – foreigners such as Thessalos – 
were specifically excluded from the sacred rites and spaces.37 If he took 
the risk of transgressing such traditional restrictions to provide a ritual 
service for a foreigner, we may assume that he expected a handsome 
payment38 – and we remember that Thessalos had come to Egypt with 
“plenty of silver.” In short, while using the stereotype of the “wise 
and powerful magus” to his best advantage,39 the priest seems to have 
been commodifying temple rituals to supplement a meager income, and 
Thessalos was behaving very much like a consumer on a tourist mar-
ket of exotic rituals and experiences.40 Traditional restrictions notwith-
standing, such transactions had become a rather frequent occurrence 
during the Roman period, as illustrated by an anonymous author from 
the third century ce:
What, then, shall I do? This shall I do. I shall proceed to Egypt, and there I 
shall cultivate the friendship of the hierophants or prophets, who preside at the 
shrines. Then I shall win over a magician by money, and entreat him, by what 
	37	 Moyer, “Thessalos,” 50–52; Moyer, Egypt, 261–262.
	38	 Moyer, “Thessalos,” 52–53, 56; Dosoo, “Rituals of Apparition,” 315; Bull, Tradition, 
449–450. On payment for private priestly services, see e.g. Frankfurter, “Religious Prac-
tice and Piety,” 326; Tallet, “Oracles,” 411–412.
	39	 I am referring to Frankfurter’s oft-quoted concept of “stereotype appropriation” (Reli-
gion in Roman Egypt, 225–233; see also Moyer, Egypt, 225–226). I am less than con-
vinced by Moyer’s argument that Thessalos himself tries to appropriate the stereotype 
(ibid., 226, 249).
	40	 Moyer, “Thessalos,” 56. On the Hellenistic romanticization and exoticization of Egyp-
tian priests as purveyors of superior ancient wisdom, who could then appropriate such 
stereotypes and use them to their own financial advantage, see Frankfurter, Religion in 
Roman Egypt, 217–237; Dieleman, Priests, 239–254.

Heart of Darkness
33
they call the necromantic art, to bring me a soul from the infernal regions, as if I 
were desirous of consulting it about some business.41
Once having paid the fee, Thessalos would expect something serious in 
return for his investment. Therefore it wouldn’t do for the priest to just 
leave him behind in a closed room, hoping for Asclepius to take care of 
the rest.42 Something impressive needed to happen. Now Thessalos was 
certainly in a receptive state. He must have felt weak and dizzy after fast-
ing for three days, and he tells us how excited he was about the prospect 
of meeting the god. It is not easy for us moderns to take the required 
leap of imagination, but we need to understand that he was not playing 
around. Our postmodern attitudes of ironic reserve would be alien to 
him – the gods were perfectly real and extremely powerful, and so the 
prospect of encountering a great deity like Asclepius face to face would 
be literally awe-inspiring. If we add to this the fact that a burnt offering 
was standard in Egyptian rituals of apparition,43 we can see the situation 
move into focus. Thessalos found himself alone in a dark temple room, 
sitting in front of an empty throne, dizzy and hungry, hoping for some-
thing extraordinary to happen but filled with anxiety, while inhaling 
the smoke of kuphi incense. The ingredients of this famous compound, 
which was used in temples all over Egypt, have been analyzed in detail. 
They appear to have had narcotic properties44 inducing a state of sleep-
like reverie and relaxation in which the subject’s imagination would be 
greatly empowered. Plutarch writes about kuphi that “the imaginative 
faculty susceptible to dreams it brightens like a mirror.”45
Therefore it is safe to assume that Thessalos beheld Asclepius in an 
altered state of consciousness. What could he have seen? Most prob-
ably the apparition took the form of a bright light, a phenomenon that 
	41	 Pseudo-Clement, Recognitions 1.5 (cf. Frankfurter, Religion in Roman Egypt, 218; Die-
leman, Priests, 253).
	42	 On the “business relationship” between priest and client, which required the former to 
produce predictable results, cf. Luck, “Psychoactive Substances,” 479–480.
	43	 Dosoo, “Rituals of Apparition,” 222.
	44	 See the extraordinarily detailed analysis by Loret, “Le Kyphi.” Further discussions can 
be found in Hopfner, Griechisch-Ägyptischer Offenbarungszauber § 544–551 (with 
many references to classical sources); Derchain, “La recette du Kyphi”; Meslin, “Réali-
tés psychiques,” 291–292; Scarborough, “Pharmacology,” 157–161; Yébenes, “El 
kyphi” (with careful distinction between narcotic and hallucinogenic effects, 360); and 
cf. LiDonnici, “Single-Stemmed Wormwood,” esp. 65, 76, 78–79; Aufrère, “Parfums et 
onguents,” esp. 50, 56. Luck lists the ingredients of incenses used in the PGM without 
mentioning kuphi specifically (“Psychoactive Substances,” 479–480).
	45	 Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride 80.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
34
was known as phōtagōgia and is mentioned frequently in the Theban 
Magical Library.46 The light would announce the arrival of the deity, 
who would then appear within it (entering it, shining through it, or 
­taking form within it). Given Plutarch’s report on how kuphi enhances 
the ­imaginative faculty, the light would function like a reflective mirror 
in which a drowsy Thessalos beheld what he expected and hoped for: a 
luminous shape that was impossible to describe exactly but could not be 
anything other for him than the body of the god.
All that remains to ask then is where the light came from. We cannot 
know for sure, but it seems reasonable to assume that the priest disposed 
of some kind of procedure for making a bright light appear in the darkness 
above the throne.47 We have seen that he needed an impressive “event” to 
make sure that Thessalos would walk out satisfied and properly impressed, 
rather than just doze off in the darkness and demand his money back after-
wards. Contrary to what we might think, such a scenario does not need 
to imply any conscious fraud (even though in specific cases, like this one, 
it certainly could). In discussing the nature of the “Egyptian Mysteries,” 
the philosopher Iamblichus is perfectly clear about the fact that luminous 
effects in which divinities appeared could be produced by technical artifice:
Sometimes [the Egyptian priests] conduct the light through water … At other 
times they cause it to shine on a wall, having expertly prepared in advance a place 
on the wall for the light with sacred inscriptions of characters [i.e. hieroglyphs], 
and at the same time fixing the light on a solid place so that it will not be too 
diffused. There might be many other ways for conducting the light, but all are 
reduced to one, i.e. the shining of the bright light in whatever way and through 
whatever instruments it may shine forth.48
Again we must beware of jumping to modern conclusions and ­reading 
this passage in terms of priestly deception or magical trickery. The key 
to luminous epiphanies, according to Iamblichus, lies in our faculty of 
	46	 Dosoo, “Rituals of Apparition,” 351–355; Dodds, Greeks and the Irrational, 298–299; 
Dieleman, “Coping,” 352–353.
	47	 On artificial light in antiquity, see Moullou, Doulos and Topalis, “Artificial Light 
Sources”; and several contributions to Papadopoulos and Moyes, Oxford Handbook of 
Light in Archaeology.
	48	 Iamblichus, Response to Porphyry III 14 (transl. Clarke et al., Iamblichus De Mysteriis, 
155–156; but with “magical symbols” replaced by “characters [hieroglyphs],” see Iam-
blichus, Réponse, 100 and 288 note 3). As regards Iamblichus’ reference to “conducting 
the light through water,” it remains an open question whether Thessalos’ vision had 
anything to do with lecanomancy (“vessel inquiry”). The priest had claimed that he 
knew its secret, but it is never mentioned again, and he might have decided on a different 
procedure.

Heart of Darkness
35
imagination (phantasia). What happens is that the external light has an 
effect on the luminous vehicle of our soul (ochēma),49 and this allows 
the gods, acting by their own volition, to “take possession of the imag-
inative power in us.”50 In other words, the human imagination was 
considered not as an agent of illusion but as a faculty of perception 
that made it possible to see the gods. The priests were merely facilitat-
ing their appearance, by using procedures and techniques of proven 
effectiveness.
Toward the Light
We can now consider the wider question of how to account for the impres-
sive visionary experiences described in countless ancient texts within the 
wider milieus of Graeco-Roman antiquity from which the Hermetica 
emerged. Iamblichus referred to such practices in the context of theurgy 
(theourgia), a term that may be translated as god-working, or the activity 
of the gods (divine acts, theia erga, or the workings of the gods, theōn 
erga). The term was meant to make a specific point: although theurgic 
rites were performed by human beings, it was the gods themselves who 
directed the work.51 Rather than seeing such practices as attempts by 
“magicians” to gain power and control over invisible entities such as 
gods or demons, it is much more correct to see them as ritual procedures 
whose goal was to create suitable conditions for the gods to manifest 
themselves. The ritual setting had to be right, you had to follow the right 
procedures, and you had to be in the right mental state. Fortunately, to 
create such conditions you did not need to start from scratch or proceed 
by trial and error on your own, for there were ancient traditions and 
	49	 On the ochēma-pneuma, see Kissling, “ΟΧΗΜΑ-ΠΝΕYΜΑ of the Neoplatonists”; Lewy, 
Chaldaean Oracles, 178–184; Finamore, Iamblichus and the Theory of the Vehicle; Majer-
cik, Chaldean Oracles, 31; Dodds, “Appendix II”; Johnston, “Fiat Lux,” 11–12; Shaw, 
Theurgy and the Soul, 51–53; Shaw, “Theurgy and the Platonist’s Luminous Body.”
	50	 Iamblichus, Response to Porphyry III 14. The ochēma-pneuma was regarded as the seat 
of both sensation and imagination (Majercik, Chaldean Oracles, 32; Kissling, “ΟΧΗΜΑ-
ΠΝΕYΜΑ,” 321, both with reference to a passage in Simplicius, In libros Aristotelis De 
Anima commentaria, 214).
	51	 Shaw, “Theurgy,” 1 (but cf. Louth, “Pagan Theurgy,” 434: Iamblichus used the term 
as more or less equivalent to mustagogia, hiera hagisteia, thrēskeia, hieratikē technē, 
hē theia epistēmē, and theosophia). Shaw’s article of 1985 stands at the origin of the 
modern study of theurgy that has broken with older approaches dominated by an obses-
sion with “rationality and irrationality.” On this crucial shift, see Tanaseanu-Döbler, 
Theurgy in Late Antiquity, 9 (with references to the most important titles representative 
of the new scholarship in note 3).

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
36
trained practitioners who could tell you what to do and how to do it. If 
such ritual procedures resulted in impressive, even spectacular visionary 
experiences, as claimed by so many texts from Graeco-Roman antiquity, 
it will not do to dismiss such claims as mere “literary fictions” grounded 
in “irrational superstition.”52 Such an approach – which, unfortunately, 
dominated research in these domains until the 1990s – is in fact deeply 
irrational itself, because it fails to provide any realistic account of what, 
according to the textual evidence, may actually have happened in theur-
gic rituals and related practices.
Next to rituals of apparition in which gods appear to human beings, 
we find descriptions of ritual ascent (anagōgē) in which the practitio-
ner himself is carried upwards to heaven and sees spectacular visions. 
A particularly famous example from the “Theban Magical [or Priestly] 
Library” is the so-called Mithras Liturgy (PGM IV 475–829).53 It 
describes how a practitioner guides his “only child,” a woman addressed 
as his “daughter,” upwards to the heavens and into the realm of the 
immortal gods. In preparation of the ascent, seven days of “purity” are 
required in which she must “abstain from meat and bath.”54 After a 
lengthy invocation to the supreme solar deity Helios Mithras, the divine 
source of light, he instructs her to “draw in breath from the rays three 
times, drawing in as much as you can,”55 after which she will see herself 
lifted upwards until reaching a position in midair. At this point she will 
find herself surrounded by utter silence, while watching the planetary 
constellations – not just as physical planets but as deities endowed with 
agency and intelligence. It is at this point that readers may begin to won-
der how such information is to be understood. We find similar proce-
dures of “­inhaling” in the foundational collection of theurgical texts, the 
	52	 See the classic discussion by Festugière (RHT I, 309–354), who specifies his approach in 
these words: “I said fictions because for us, moderns, it is evident that the Hellenistic sto-
ries of revelation contain absolutely no foundation of truth” (RHT I, 309). Festugière’s 
blind spot is on full display in his statement that “the authors who speak of ecstasy and 
celestial ascent are perfectly aware that this does not concern a real fact but a psycho-
logical phenomenon” (RHT I, 315): apparently he does not consider psychological phe-
nomena to be “real facts” or entertain the possibility that they may provide his materials 
with a “foundation of truth.”
	53	 Betz, Greek Magical Papyri, 48–54; Dieterich, Mithrasliturgie; Betz, The “Mithras Lit-
urgy” (discussion of its relation to the Hermetica on 35–38, unfortunately based on 
Festugière’s notion of “literary fictions”).
	54	 PGM IV 735–736 (transl. Betz, “Mithras Liturgy”, 57). This requirement of purity 
appears in the instructions about how the “daughter” can initiate another person, so we 
may logically assume that it applies to her as well.
	55	 PGM IV 539 (transl. Betz, “Mithras Liturgy”, 51).

Heart of Darkness
37
Chaldaean Oracles,56 and it seems clear that this “breath from the rays” 
must mean the divine pneuma that is emanating from the supreme source 
of light. As an effect of inhaling pneuma, the vehicle of the soul (the 
ochēma, see above) becomes illuminated, literally “having the appear-
ance of light.”57 The gods have now taken possession of it and lift the 
soul upwards.58
This is what the authors of the “Mithras Liturgy” and the 
Chaldaean Oracles are telling us, but we are still left at the level of 
pure ­description. How are we to understand what we are reading 
here? To be more precise: what could have been happening to the 
­practitioner that would convince her that she was actually drifting 
upwards in the air, entered a great silence, and beheld the heavenly 
bodies as living beings? This question is the elephant in the room of 
modern ­scholarship on theurgy – almost without exception, even the 
most knowledgeable and perceptive specialists ignore or avoid it.59 
This silence is all the more remarkable because at least in the case 
of the “Mithras Liturgy,” it so happens that the keys for a plausible 
­solution are readily ­available. We have seen that the gods appeared to 
the ­theurgist by “taking ­possession” of his luminous vehicle and acti-
vating its imaginative ­powers. Michael Psellos (who had access to mate-
rials that we no longer possess60) writes that according to Proclus, the 
vehicle is “empowered” (dunamōsomen) or “purified” (­kathairesthai) 
by means of “stones, herbs, and incantations”:
The Chaldaean says that we cannot be borne upwards towards god, unless we 
empower the vehicle of the soul by material sacraments. For he believes that 
	56	 Chal. Or., fragm. 124 and 130 (Majercik, Chaldean Oracles, 96–99). Admittedly, the 
pneuma is not mentioned explicitly here; but like Johnston (“Fiat Lux,” 13–14; “Ris-
ing to the Occasion,” 181) and Edmonds (“Did the Mithraists Inhale?,” 15–16), I find 
it plausible that what is being inhaled in fragm. 124 must in fact be the “warm breath” 
(fragm. 123) or the “flowering flames” (fragm. 130) of the solar pneuma. Bull contests 
this interpretation, while emphasizing the inhalation of kuphi incense instead (Tradition, 
417–424). The two interpretations do not strike me as mutually exclusive: while breath-
ing hard to inhale solar pneuma, the practitioner would in fact be filling her lungs with 
kuphi smoke.
	57	 Cf. Chal. Or. fragm. 122–123: the soul is “set ablaze with fire” and “rendered light by 
a warm pneuma … causing a rising up through the anagogic life” (Tanaseanu-Döbler, 
Theurgy, 30).
	58	 See Johnston, “Fiat Lux,” 11–14; Johnston, “Animating Statues,” 459–460; Edmonds, 
“Did the Mithraists Inhale?”
	59	 But see Bergemann, “Inkubation”; Litwa, “‘Immortalized’.” For theurgy generally, cf. 
Luck, “Theurgy and Forms of Worship.”
	60	 Johnston, “Fiax Lux,” 7.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
38
the soul is purified by stones, herbs and conjurations and consequently becomes 
more agile with a view to the ascension.61
Such a use of “herbs” is confirmed explicitly by the author of the “Mithras 
Liturgy”: “it is necessary for you, O daughter, to take the juices of herbs 
and drugs, which will be [made known] to you at the end of my sacred 
treatise.”62 In sum, there is really no mystery here. Some kind of herbal 
concoction was required that would enable the pupil to inhale pneuma 
into her soul vehicle so that the gods could empower its imaginative fac-
ulties. The actual effect must have been enhanced by the simultaneous 
practice of inhaling the smoke of kuphi incense, a standard ingredient of 
such practices mentioned explicitly in our text.63
We do in fact find a detailed recipe affixed to the “Mithras Liturgy.” 
You need to prepare a cake from honey and the fruit pulp of the lotus, 
and feed this to a sun scarab. It will kill the scarab, who must then be 
thrown into a glass vessel with high-quality rose oil; and having placed 
the vessel on “sacred sand,” a consecration must be spoken over it during 
seven days. Then the scarab must be buried in a piece of linen together 
with myrrh and Mendesian wine, finally resulting in an ointment that can 
be used for the ritual of ascent.64 It is known that Egyptian water ­lilies 
(lōtos, genus Nymphaea) had narcotic and hallucinogenic properties,65 
and myrrh (hcl) is described in the Demotic Magical Papyri as a compo-
nent of an eye paint prescribed for visionary applications.66 Indeed, that 
is exactly what the author of the “Mithras Liturgy” appears to have in 
	61	 Psellus, Exposition on the Chaldaean Oracles, in: Migne, Patrologia Graeca, vol. 122, 
1131 A (Lewy, Chaldaean Oracles and Theurgy, 178; Majercik, Chaldean Oracles, 36).
	62	 PGM IV 479–491 (transl. Betz, “Mithras Liturgy”, 50; on the translation of εἰδῶν as 
“drugs,” see ibid., 97).
	63	 PGM IV 512. See Bull, Tradition, 417–424 (and above, note 56); and below, Chapter 3, 
p. 71 with notes 101–103.
	64	 PGM IV 752–772 (transl. Betz, “Mithras Liturgy”, 57–58); on Mendesian wine, see 
LiDonnici, “Beans, Fleawort,” 363–364.
	65	 Emboden, “Transcultural Use of Narcotic Water Lilies”; Emboden, “Sacred Journey in 
Dynastic Egypt”; Bertol et alii, “Nymphaea Cults in Ancient Egypt”; Aufrère, “Parfums 
et onguents liturgiques,” 49, 52: Greek λωτός means “Nile water-lily, Egyptian lotus, 
Nymphaea Lotus” (Liddell and Scott, Greek-English Lexicon, 1070).
	66	 PDM XIV 295–308, 805–840, 875–885 (LiDonnici, “Single-Stemmed Wormwood,” 67 
with note 33; on myrrh more generally, see also Aufrère, “Parfums et onguents,” 29 note 
1). See also PDM XIV 93–114, where myrrh and qs-cnh-stone (identified as “probably 
hematite”) are prescribed for a fumigation that will induce a sleep in which you will see 
a god. Even the Sun Scarab juice may have had hallucinogenic properties due to dung 
beetles ingesting psilocybin from mushrooms of the Psilocybe genus (on the preference 
of this genus for feeding on mushrooms, see Frolov, Akhmetova and Scholtz, “Revi-
sion,” 1483–1484; on Psilocybe species growing on cow dung, see Guzmán, Genus 
Psilocybe; Guzmán, “Supplement”).

Heart of Darkness
39
mind: “get the juice of the herb called kentritis, and smear it, along with 
the rose oil, around the eyes of whomever you wish; and he will see so 
clearly that you will be amazed (thaumazein).”67 This kentritis plant and 
several other ingredients have so far resisted identification,68 but clearly 
the authors of the Papyri knew them and were able to prepare the oint-
ment. Apart from this substance that was to be rubbed into the eyes, or 
smeared around it, we are also told about letters (ϊ εε οο ϊαϊ) that must be 
written on a leaf with an ink made of kentritis, honey, and myrrh, and 
then licked off. The author claims that he has often done this himself 
and has been “super-amazed” (huperethaumasa) by the effect.69 These 
instructions make perfect sense, for the Greek Magical Papyri contain 
literally dozens of references to myrrh, not only as a psychoactive agent 
but also as a component of black ink for the writing of ritually important 
words, characters, or pictures.70
Since we cannot decipher all the components of these recipes, the exact 
psychological effects of combining myrrh, water lilies, and kentritis with 
other unidentified ingredients, while simultaneously inhaling kuphi, must 
remain a matter of speculation.71 However, we can be confident that they 
would have a strong impact on the state of consciousness of theurgical 
practitioners, making them highly sensitive and receptive to suggestion 
while inducing powerful visual and possibly auditory hallucinations. 
To properly understand the theurgic process from such a perspective, it 
remains important to emphasize the crucial importance of mental expec-
tations and ritual context,72 for these are largely responsible for what is 
	67	 PGM IV 773–775 (transl. Betz, “Mithras Liturgy”, 58).
	68	 For the most serious attempt at identifying kentritis, see Dieterich, Mithrasliturgie, 
21–22, based on an analysis made by his friend M. Wellmann; but see also the detailed 
analysis in Hopfner, Griechisch-Ägyptischer Offenbarungszauber § 500.
	69	 PGM IV 791–792 (transl. Betz, “Mithras Liturgy”, 58).
	70	 PGM I 1–42, 232–247, II 1–64, III 165–186, IV 850–929, 930–1114, 3209–3254, V 
304–369, VII 467–477, 505–528, VIII 64–110, XII 179–181, XIXb 1–3 (LiDonnici, 
“Single-Stemmed Wormwood,” 66–67 with note 23–26).
	71	 The problem is compounded by the fact that priests used code-names to conceal the 
nature of herbs and substances they were using: see the fascinating de-codification list 
in PGM XII 401–444 (discussion in Scarborough, “Pharmacology of Sacred Plants,” 
159–160; LiDonnici, “Beans, Fleawort,” 366–377; and Dieleman, Priests, 189–203).
	72	 Johnston assigns a central place to the “Mithras Liturgy” in her reconstruction of 
theurgic ritual (“Rising to the Occasion,” 183) and asks the crucial question “How 
often did practitioners really manage to see or hear the remarkable things that ancient 
spells promised them they would see and hear” (“Authority,” 51). She answers it in 
terms of their mental conditioning by the “vivid story-world” of Greek Mythic nar-
ratives (ibid.); but although she seems to assume that practitioners were in a “trance 
state” (ibid., 52), she does not address the question of how it might have been induced 

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
40
actually seen and heard in any drug-fueled experience.73 Since our female 
practitioner in the “Mithras Liturgy” has been told that she is about to 
see the gods, she is prepared for awe-inspiring experiences of fire and 
light. She must have expected to be overwhelmed and deeply impressed, 
and we know that the exact content of her experience will have been 
determined by how the subjective contents of her own mind (including 
her belief in the gods, the stories she knows about them, fears about their 
awesome power, and so on) interact with the objective impact of a spe-
cific psychoactive compound. Furthermore, she is being guided through 
the experience by a ritual leader who gives her precise instructions about 
what to do and say at any moment.
If we reread the text with this information in mind, we discover that 
in fact he does not begin by asking his daughter to inhale the pneuma. 
Rather, what happens is that he recites the long opening invocation while 
simultaneously “anointing her face with the mystery”74 – that is to say, 
with the hallucinogenic ointment. While it is beginning to take effect, she 
is instructed to do the inhalations, three times in succession, “drawing 
in as much as you can.”75 The drugs must be responsible for the ensu-
ing sensation of ascending upwards and floating weightlessly in midair. 
Having been enveloped by deep silence (another possible drug effect), 
initially the practitioner feels threatened by the awesome presence of the 
divine powers, which are glowering at her and seem ready to attack her. 
To keep them at bay, she must put her right finger on her mouth and say 
“Silence! Silence! Silence! Symbol of the living imperishable god. Guard 
	73	 I am referring to the fundamental concept of “set” (personality, preparation, expecta-
tion, and intention of the person having the experience) and “setting” (the physical, 
social, and cultural environment in which the experience takes place); see Hartogsohn, 
“Constructing Drug Effects,” 1 and passim.
	74	 Contra Edmonds, “Did the Mithraists Inhale?,” 13 (“no other mode of ascent [than 
inhaling pneuma] is ever mentioned. The sun’s rays are clearly the primary means…”). 
Cf. above, note 54: again I assume that the procedure for initiating a third person must 
be identical to how the instructor proceeds with his “daughter.”
	75	 PGM IV 539 (transl. Betz, “Mithras Liturgy”, 51). Depending on a person’s individual 
susceptibility to trance states, certain breathing techniques involving hyperventilation 
can induce powerful visionary experiences even without the use of hallucinogenic agents 
(e.g. Grof, Beyond the Brain, 387–390); in combination with them, the effect will be 
further enhanced.
and never mentions the textual references to herbs and plants (in “Rising,” 182 she 
mentions the “honey-milk” of PGM I 1–42 and the swallowing of ink in PGM XIII 
124–136, but the recipes in the “Mithras Liturgy” itself are passed over in silence). 
Likewise, Tanaseanu-Döbler discusses theurgy as ritual tradition but does not seem to 
see this dimension as relevant.

Heart of Darkness
41
me, Silence! Nechtheir thanmelou!”76 Then she has to hiss at them and 
make a popping sound, followed by a longer formula of incomprehen-
sible words, all of which will have the effect of restoring them to peace. 
Likewise, when disturbed by a sound of crashing thunder, she has to 
repeat these same words, reassuring the gods that she is no alien intruder 
but an immortal being like themselves: “I am a star, wandering about 
with you.”77
Now the sun will start expanding – another fearsome event to which 
she must respond with the same formulas, the hissing, and the popping 
sounds. Multiple five-pronged stars will proceed from the sun and fill 
the air, to which she can respond in like manner. From a perspective 
informed by modern psychology, all of this makes perfect sense: when-
ever some new phenomenon threatens to throw her off balance in her 
fragile state, she can hold on to the formula and the sounds to help her 
restore a sense of balance and control. Finally, she will see the sun “open-
ing up” in front of her, and notice great doors inside that are tightly shut. 
Now she has to recite a long prayer, including strings of incomprehen-
sible words, asking for the doors to open. She must repeat it seven times, 
for each of the seven planetary gods, until finally (with a great noise and 
shaking, to which she can respond again with the “Silence…” formula) 
the doors open. Then she will behold the world of the gods inside, and 
this spectacle will give her great pleasure and joy.
Next she has to invite the gods to come forward through the gate, by 
inhaling more pneuma, keeping her gaze fixed on the sun’s inner space, 
and pronouncing a new formula with many incomprehensible words. The 
rays of the sun will turn toward her, and while she keeps gazing firmly into 
the center, a beautiful young god will appear. Greeting him with the proper 
words, she asks him to announce her presence to his father, the greatest 
god, pointing out that although born as a mortal human being, today she 
has been reborn as an immortal one. In other words, again, they should 
not claim that she has no business being here. Without losing sight of the 
god, she is instructed to make a strong bellowing sound, exhaling all her 
breath while squeezing her loins, kissing her phylacteries (protective amu-
lets), and asking for protection. Seven virgins with the faces of asps and 
carrying golden wands will emerge from the deep within, followed later 
	76	 PGM IV 558–560 (transl. Betz, “Mithras Liturgy”, 52). We have no explanation for the 
Greek words (ibid., 149 with note 349–350). On the complex meanings of σύμβολον, see 
Struck, Birth of the Symbol.
	77	 PGM IV 574 (transl. Betz, “Mithras Liturgy”, 52).

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
42
by seven gods with the faces of black bulls and carrying golden diadems.78 
She has to greet them all with the correct formulas. Finally the great god 
Helios himself appears, as a youthful golden-haired entity of enormous 
size, and again the practitioner must respond with bellowing sounds, full 
exhalation of breath, and kissing of the phylacteries. Having implored the 
god to “dwell in her soul” and not abandon her, she then asks him for a 
revelation, to which he will respond immediately by pronouncing an oracle 
in verses.79 After this he departs. The practitioner is told that she will be left 
behind feeling “weak in her soul” and quite beyond herself, speechless and 
wondering how to comprehend the message. Later on, her father/guide 
assures her, she will find it all back in her memory.
Private Experiential Practices
When discussing texts of this kind, many scholars feel compelled to dis-
tance themselves from their contents by using disparaging qualifiers such 
as “murky,” “bizarre,” “abstruse,” or “sub-philosophical”80 – almost 
like apotropaic formulae to ward off the suspicions of colleagues who 
might think they take it all too seriously. A variant of the same reflex 
mechanism consists in overemphasizing the “magical” nature of such rit-
uals, thereby distancing them from the greater legitimacy that would be 
implied by adjectives such as “religious” or “priestly.”81 We speak of the 
Theban Magical Library and the Greek Magical Papyri, but while those 
labels were already current early on, it is significant that Karl Preisendanz 
in his standard German translations of 1928 and 1931 kept arbitrarily 
adding the prefix “Zauber-” and interpreting everything as “magical” by 
default: hence, any reference to praxis and pragmateia (act, acting) was 
turned into a “magical act (Zauberhandlung)”, botanai (plants) auto-
matically became “magical plants,” charaktēras (signs) became “magical 
	78	 On the identification of these male and female deities, representing the stars in the con-
stellations of Ursa Minor and Major, see Betz, “Mithras Liturgy”, 175–179; Edmonds, 
“Did the Mithraists Inhale?,” 11.
	79	 Cf. discussion of divine possession below, pp. 110–112. It seems reasonable to assume 
that the invitation to the god to “dwell in her soul” is not intended metaphorically but 
means that his divine light takes possession of her soul. It would be consistent with a 
scenario of divine possession in an altered state of consciousness that the god gives his 
oracle by using the voice of the practitioner herself.
	80	 These adjectives, used by John Dillon in a well-known chapter about what he calls “the 
Underworld of Platonism” (Middle Platonists, 384), are repeated for instance by Majer-
cik, Chaldean Oracles, 3–4 and Edmonds, “Did the Mithraists Inhale?,” 10.
	81	 See for instance Ritner, Mechanics, 4–13, with some good examples in note 4.

Heart of Darkness
43
signs,” epaoidais (songs) became “magical songs,” and onomai (names) 
became “magical names.”82 By such translation procedures, scholars have 
been actively creating “magic” rather than finding it in their materials. In 
reality, it is clear that the Egyptian authors of the papyri simply did not 
share the opinion of their Roman occupiers that “magic” (mageia) was 
something negative, nonreligious, or shameful. On the contrary, while 
they did use the term when writing in Greek, they consistently described 
it as a “holy” and “divine” pursuit for which they had perfectly positive 
terms available in their own language, as we do in ours.83 The conclusion 
is simple: “Roman notions of ‘magic’ were alien to Egypt, and Egyptian 
practices were suspect to Rome.”84 The problem is that our tradition of 
modern scholarship has taken its cue from Rome, not from Egypt. When 
we refer to the Mithras Liturgy as containing “murky,” “abstruse,” or 
“bizarre” forms of “magic,” we are still speaking like Romans, not like 
Egyptians. It is the language of suspicion and contempt.
A mountain of theoretical scholarship would like to convince us that 
the problem of “magic versus religion” is enormously complicated and 
probably impossible to resolve, yet it seems to me that the situation is 
more simple than it might seem.85 Essentially we are dealing with the 
basic translator’s dilemma86 and need to make a choice: do we want 
to stay as close as possible to the original lexical terms, regardless of 
what these have come to mean for us in our own common discourse, or 
should we look for words that help us make their meaning understood 
by ­modern readers? As already demonstrated by my argument concern-
ing the term “spirituality,” I am consistently opting for the latter. This 
means that the “Theban Magical Library” should better be referred to as 
the “Theban Priestly Library,” simply because it documents the activi-
ties of Egyptian priests. We complicate the task of understanding their 
	82	 Otto, Magie, 385; for an illustrative example, see note 48 (translations of Iamblichus, 
Response to Porphyry III 14). The label “Greek Magical Papyri” was current well before 
Preisendanz; see e.g. Mead, Thrice-Greatest Hermes, vol. 1, 82–98.
	83	 Otto, Magie, 386; Ritner, Mechanics, 14–28; Brashear, “Greek Magical Papyri,” 3390–
3392. For the “paradigm shift” in ancient Athens which had led to a separation between 
“religion” and “magic” that was inherited by the Romans, the fundamental discussion is 
Graf, Gottesnähe, 31–36 (cf. Dickie, Magic and Magicians, 21–21 with note 8, pointing 
to the limitations of the English translation of Graf’s book).
	84	 Ritner, “Egyptian Magical Practice,” 3355.
	85	 For the larger argument, see Hanegraaff, “Magic”; and cf. Hanegraaff, Esotericism and 
the Academy, 164–177. For a decisive analysis of the debate as a whole, see Otto, Magie, 
37–132 (for English summary, see Hanegraaff, Review of Otto).
	86	 Raffel, “Forked Tongue,” 49.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
44
practices, while underestimating the power of language over our own and 
our ­readers’ imagination, if we keep insisting on the pejorative categories 
of their opponents even where more neutral terminologies are readily 
available. Referring to these practitioners as “magicians” while pretend-
ing to take them seriously is equivalent to insulting them while claiming 
to be ­impartial. It is simply not consistent, and has never worked.
Interestingly, a reverse logic seems to govern the virtual taboo on dis-
cussing psychoactive agents in such texts as the “Mithras Liturgy.” While 
most classicists keep speaking of “magic” in spite of its pejorative conno-
tations, they avoid mentioning “drugs” probably because it carries such 
connotations!87 This fact can be explained from the history of the field. 
From the 1980s, a new generation of excellent scholars began challeng-
ing the old patterns of prejudice against theurgy and finally succeeded 
in restoring it to academic agendas. But while it is one thing to convince 
your colleagues that theurgy is governed by “a rationality of its own,”88 
having to tell them that it involved drugs is something else entirely – the 
latter suggestion might easily lead them to conclude that those old preju-
dices were perhaps not so wrong after all, and those alternative rationali-
ties might not be so rational. The effect that such information can have 
on nonspecialists is even harder to control, and very few scholars have 
been willing to take the risk – especially in the field of ancient religions, 
where several established academics have seen their reputations ruined 
by mediatized sensationalism about “religion and drugs.”89 No won-
der then that most scholars would like to avoid those “herbs” and their 
troublesome effects. Nevertheless, the references are there in our sources, 
	87	 A notable exception is Georg Luck, “Theurgy and Forms of Worship”; Luck, “Psycho-
active Substances.”
	88	 Tanaseanu-Döbler, Theurgy, 9; and see Emma C. Clarke’s well taken reservations about 
this general approach (Iamblichus’ De Mysteriis, 1–2, 30, 119–121).
	89	 For the classicist Carl A.P. Ruck and academic responses to his thesis of a psychoactive 
sacrament at the heart of the Eleusinian Mysteries (see Wasson, Hofmann and Ruck, 
Road to Eleusis, published by Ruck in collaboration with two iconic figures of the psy-
chedelic counterculture), see summary overview in Luck, Review of Wasson, Hofmann 
and Ruck (referring, inter alia, to Walter Burkert, Ancient Mystery Cults, 108–114: an 
authoritative but problematic analysis that shows how even a very great scholar can be 
led astray by popular stereotypes about “drugs”). For the Dead Sea Scrolls specialist 
John M. Allegro, who ruined his academic reputation with his bestseller The Sacred 
Mushroom and the Cross (1970), see Hanegraaff, “Academic Suicide.” For the German 
historian Will-Erich Peuckert and the media hype that was provoked by a passing refer-
ence he made, in a public lecture, about an experiment in his early youth with the medi-
eval witches’ ointment as a hallucinogenic agent, see Hanegraaff, “Will-Erich Peuckert,” 
280 with note 4 (referring to Jacobsen, “Boundary Breaking”).

Heart of Darkness
45
and much more abundantly than is often thought. The ­information 
is ­obviously important for understanding how these rituals may have 
worked and why practitioners could be so impressed by their efficacy. If 
our own hinterland of cultural biases makes it hard for us to consider this 
dimension seriously, then the burden is on us to do something about it.90
What happens if we really stop imagining Roman Egypt as a primi-
tive “heart of darkness”91 full of murky magic, superstition, and irra-
tional delusions? We then see one of the greatest cultures of the ancient 
world struggling to survive under foreign domination. Its religious 
institutions had been the fabric of society for thousands of years, but 
now the temples are in decay and have lost most of their traditional 
power and prestige. They have been reduced essentially to private enter-
prises, and its priests are forced to compete on a pluralistic religious 
market imposed by external forces that are hostile or simply indifferent 
to their sacred traditions. In the terms of a famous analytical model, the 
result during the Roman period was a growing tension between “loca-
tive” and “non-locative” (“utopian”) modes of religious practice.92 The 
former were inherently conservative, as they represented ancient cultic 
traditions tied to specific places: the temples and sanctuaries where the 
gods were at home. But in the cosmopolitan culture of the Hellenistic 
world, characterized by unprecedented degrees of mobility and inter-
cultural exchange, this locative character of traditional religion began 
to give way to a type of religion that could be practiced “here, there, 
and anywhere”93:
Certain cult centers remained sites of pilgrimage or sentimental attachment, but 
the old beliefs in national deities and the inextricable relationship of the deity to 
particular places was weakened. Rather than a god who dwelt in his temple or 
would regularly manifest himself in a cult house, the diaspora evolved compli-
cated techniques for achieving visions, epiphanies or heavenly journeys. That is 
to say, they evolved modes of access to the deity which transcended any particu-
lar place.94
	90	 On the hinterland concept and its background in “enactment realism,” see Law, After 
Method, esp. 140–142; for its relevance to “collective set and setting,” see Hartogsohn, 
“Constructing Drug Effects,” 10.
	91	 Frankfurter, Religion in Roman Egypt, 166.
	92	 For a short summary, see Smith, Map is not Territory, xi–xvi; cf. Frankfurter, “Religious 
Practice and Piety,” 326. Smith’s choice for the term “utopian” is unfortunate because 
its literal meaning of “no place” has obviously been overwritten in common parlance by 
the concept of an ideal society.
	93	 Smith, “Here, There, and Anywhere.”
	94	 Smith, Map is not Territory, xiv.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
46
What we see here is a truly momentous development that is typical of 
cosmopolitan situations (including, obviously, what we would call glo-
balization today). Next to religion understood as a social formation, 
representative of traditional communities and intimately tied up with 
the very fabric of society, we get other and more fluid types of religion 
more suitable to mobile individuals because they can be practiced any-
where and are focused on the cultivation of private experiences. Not by 
any coincidence, this is the very definition of what we call “spirituality” 
today.95 Once again, the ingrained tendency of referring to spiritual prac-
titioners as “magicians” is deeply misleading.96
The emerging market for spirituality provided Egyptian priests with 
obvious opportunities. It was easy for foreigners to romanticize and 
idealize these mysterious, bald, clean-shaven men in their white robes 
as initiates in superior wisdom, masters of ancient mysteries – and the 
appropriation of such stereotypes could be very much in the interest of 
the priests themselves. Forced to redefine their role in society, they discov-
ered the great appeal that they held for a new audience willing to look up 
to them as spiritual leaders and teachers. The inevitable commodification 
of ritual services and visionary experiences that resulted from this situ-
ation does not need to be interpreted in terms of a cynical commercial-
ism.97 Priests need to eat too, and it would make sense for their pupils or 
clients that something was expected from them in return for the privilege 
of receiving precious spiritual insights, ritual guidance, and initiation into 
deep mysteries. This is very much how things still work in contemporary 
spiritual contexts on the global marketplace,98 and we have no reason to 
assume they would work in any way differently in Roman Egypt.
	95	 See above, pp. 19–21. In such a context, “spiritualities” (plural) may be defined in terms 
of the individual manipulation of symbolic systems basic to “religions” (Hanegraaff, 
“Defining Religion,” 371–373; cf. Hanegraaff, Western Esotericism, 138–140).
	96	 For instance, see how easily the “spirituality” concept resolves the disagreement between 
Jonathan Z. Smith and Robert K. Ritner (Ritner, “Egyptian Magical Practice,” 3356–
3358; Ritner, Mechanics, 219–220; summary in Moyer, “Thessalos,” 39–41, 49), which 
is grounded in little else than the fact that both hold on to the idea of “magic” as the 
practice of private entrepreneurs against “religion” as a social formation. This approach 
comes ultimately from the French social-scientific school in the study of religions linked 
to the names of Marcel Mauss and Emile Durkheim, who took their cue from the pejo-
rative understanding of “magic” typical of the Roman Empire. For the circular logic, 
internal contradictions, and ethnocentric bias that governed their thought on this mat-
ter, see Hanegraaff, “Defining Religion,” 341–345; cf. Hanegraaff, “Magic,” 394–395.
	97	 Tallet, “Oracles,” 412; Frankfurter, “Voices,” 238–239.
	98	 For an instructive parallel, see the analysis in Brabec de Mori, “From the Native’s Point 
of View.”

Heart of Darkness
47
If I have called some special attention to the role of psychoactive 
­substances in this context, it is because the relative neglect of that dimen-
sion needs to be corrected while the underlying mechanisms of discursive 
marginalization must be properly understood. The implication is not that 
psychoactives are in any way central to the spiritual culture under discus-
sion or to the Hermetica more specifically. Rather, they should be seen 
as part of a much broader, far more diverse and complex repertoire of 
techniques and procedures that were available to spiritual practitioners 
in late antiquity. Michel Foucault’s famous concept “technologies of the 
self” defines the topic exactly:
[T]echnologies of the self … permit individuals to effect by their own means 
or with the help of others a certain number of operations on their own bodies 
and souls, thoughts, conduct, and way of being, so as to transform themselves 
in order to attain a certain state of happiness, purity, wisdom, perfection, or 
immortality.99
It is hard to think of a better short summary of what Hermetic spiritu-
ality was all about. The impact of such technologies on an individual’s 
state of consciousness could range from subtle perceptual changes to 
powerful altered states. The argument of this book is that such psycho-
logical effects are key to some of the most important Hermetic treatises 
(notably CH I, CH XIII, and NH VI6) and are taken for granted even in 
philosophical or theological discussions with a theoretical rather than 
practical focus. This is true to such an extent that if we fail to take them 
seriously, the most important dimensions of the Hermetic literature will 
remain incomprehensible for us. But before moving to an in-depth analy-
sis of those treatises in which alterations of consciousness and visionary 
experiences take center stage, we will begin with a broad introduction to 
the Hermetic worldview as presented in a comparatively nonexperiential 
treatise. This is the Logos teleios, known in Latin as the Asclepius.
	99	 Foucault, “Technologies of the Self,” 18.

48
Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold;
mere anarchy is loosed upon the world,
the blood-dimmed tide is loosed, and everywhere
the ceremony of innocence is drowned.
W.B. Yeats, “The Second Coming.”
On March 19, 235 ce, the young Roman Emperor Severus Alexander 
and his mother were assassinated at the order of a general who had 
assumed control over the army.1 This was the beginning of what histo-
rians call “the crisis of the third century,” a fifty-year period of anarchy 
and civil war that brought the Roman Empire close to total collapse. No 
fewer than twenty-four emperors came and went, most of them meet-
ing a violent death. Some committed suicide, many were killed by the 
Pretorian Guard, while others died on the battlefield. A few of them suc-
cumbed to the plague, for in the midst of this period of crisis, the empire 
was struck by a frightening pandemic. It killed so many people on both 
sides of the Mediterranean – at one point, the death toll in Rome seems to 
have been around 5,000 each day – that Cyprian, the Bishop of Carthage, 
believed the end of the world had arrived.2 As if all that were not enough, 
Egypt was invaded in 270 ce by the armies of the Syrian queen Septimia 
Zenobia. She brought the eastern part of the empire under her control 
for a few years but was eventually defeated by the Emperor Aurelian. 
3
The Presence of Gods
	1	 Herodian, Hist. VI.8–9.
	2	 Cyprian, “De mortalitate,” in: Roberts, Donaldson and Coxe, Ante-Nicene Fathers, vol. 
5, 469–475. For further contemporary perspectives, see Alföldy, “Crisis of the Third 
Century.”

The Presence of Gods
49
As Roman military control was weakening, Upper Egypt suffered inva-
sions by desert tribes from Libya and Nubia.3 In the midst of all this 
violent turmoil and chaos, more and more Egyptians were leaving their 
ancient religion behind and converted to Christianity, the new religion 
that seemed to be taking the world by storm.
At some time during this period of crisis, somewhere in Egypt, an 
anonymous devotee of Hermes Trismegistus composed a text in Greek 
about the way of true wisdom. Known as the Logos teleios, usually 
translated as “Perfect Discourse,” it is the longest and most explicitly 
Egyptian text among all the spiritual Hermetica that have come down 
to us.4 Situated in the inner sanctuary of an Egyptian temple, it describes 
a divinely inspired speech by Hermes Trismegistus directed at his pupils 
Asclepius, Tat, and Ammon. Initially, the atmosphere of pious serenity 
might seem like a contrast with the social and political realities outside 
the temple precincts, exemplifying an “inward turn” towards spiritual 
experience as a way of ignoring or trying to escape from the evils of the 
world. But as we read further, it becomes evident that those evils are very 
much present, like a rumbling noise in the distance that keeps coming 
closer. In the older scholarly literature the Logos teleios has often been 
described as an “optimistic” treatise, but something is wrong with that 
assessment.5 Hermes is telling his pupils that all true spiritual wisdom is 
in decline on earth: just a few people are still keeping it alive, but very 
soon there will be literally none of them left.6 The gods are abandoning 
Egypt, and ruthless criminals are taking their place. The future of human-
ity looks very dark indeed.
	3	 Lindsay, Origins of Alchemy, 339–340.
	4	 The most serious contender would be the collection of Isis-Horus discussions known 
as SH XXIII–XXVII, which I see as marginal to the spiritual Hermetica for reasons 
explained below, Chapter 5, p. 141. On the Egyptian background of the Asclepius, see 
Sternberg-el Hotabi, “Ägyptische Religion und Hermetismus.”
	5	 The distinction between “optimistic” (monistic, pantheist, or “Hellenistic”) and “pes-
simistic” (dualistic, “gnostic,” or “orientalist”) Hermetic treatises was introduced by 
Zielinski (“Hermes und die Hermetik,” 1905) and decisively by Bousset (Review of 
Kroll, 1914). Festugière (RHT II–IV) adopted it as his basic conceptual framework for 
understanding the Hermetic literature as a whole. It has been abandoned as a mislead-
ing straitjacket by modern scholars in the wake of Mahé (HHE II, 290–291, 438, 459); 
cf. Mahé, “Le rôle de l’élément astrologique”; Mahé, “Mental Faculties”) and Fowden 
(Egyptian Hermes, e.g. 102). Taking inspiration from the comparison with closely related 
figures, notably Zosimos and Iamblichus (see below, Chapter 4, pp. 82–118), scholars 
now approach the dynamics of transcendence versus immanence in Hermetic literature 
from completely different perspectives, to which I will return (e.g. Chlup, “Ritualiza-
tion”; Fraser, “Baptised”; Shaw, “Taking the Shape”; Bull, Tradition, 187–372).
	6	 Ascl. 12, 14.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
50
Distant Voices
Modern readers encounter this “Perfect Discourse” under the title of its 
Latin translation, the Asclepius. But how reliable are the versions that 
we have at our disposal? Before trying to make sense of their content, 
we need to consider what happened to the text between the third century 
and our own time. To begin with, the original Logos teleios is lost to 
us: of the Greek text, nothing remains but a few short passages quoted 
by Christian writers plus the closing prayer, preserved in one of the so-
called Greek Magical Papyri known as the Papyrus Mimaut.7 During the 
following century, some time after 320 ce somewhere in northern Africa 
(but not in Egypt itself),8 an unknown individual produced a Latin trans-
lation – or rather, something close to a paraphrase or an adapted version 
“more concerned with solemnity than with precision.”9 This is the origin 
of the text we know as the Asclepius.
It is important to gauge the distance that existed already between 
this Latin translation and its lost Greek original. The Church had not 
yet emerged victorious by the middle of the third century, and there 
is no clear trace of Christian influence in what we know of the Logos 
teleios. But in the first half of the fourth century, when Constantine the 
Great began profiling himself as the first Christian emperor, the bal-
ance shifted decisively in favor of the new religion. During the period 
when the Latin Asclepius must have been written down, only the short 
reign of the Emperor Julian (from 361 to 363 ce) could still have kin-
dled some hopes for pagan restoration among Hermetic practitioners. 
It would seem that the Latin translator was a warm supporter of tra-
ditional Egyptian worship but not an active participant in the Way of 
Hermes – if any such practice still existed. We may imagine him as a 
cultivated man, “an important man, certainly, but not eminent; perhaps 
one of those gentrified gentlemen from the provinces, proud of their edu-
cation and belonging to the last defenders of paganism.”10 The explicit 
sexual passages in the Logos teleios embarrassed him, and he tried to 
	 7	 Papyrus Mimaut = PGM III, see lines 591–610. For references to the Logos teleios in 
Lactantius, see overviews in CHD, 570–571; Litwa, Hermetica II, 183 note 5; testimo-
nia in ibid., 184–192. For Cyril of Alexandria, see testimonia in ibid., 205–214.
	 8	 Dating and geographical origin: Mahé, “Fragment du Discours Parfait,” 309–310; HHE 
II, 55–58; cf. Fowden, Egyptian Hermes, 198; Moreschini, Dall’Asclepius, 71–72 note 2.
	 9	 HT II, 276. Cf. Mahé, “Prière,” 54; HHE I, 23; HHE II, 36, 51–52; Wigtil, “Incorrect 
Apocalyptic,” 2286; Fowden, Egyptian Hermes, 10.
	10	 HHE II, 60–61.

The Presence of Gods
51
play down its emphasis on the immortality of the soul and man’s inner 
divinity.11 In other words, he seems to have been somewhat detached 
already from the original Hermetic and Egyptian perspective, approach-
ing it as a sympathizing outsider rather than a convinced adherent.
We can draw these conclusions because, independently but around the 
same time (arguably between 340 and 370),12 some lengthy passages from 
the Logos teleios were translated from Greek into Coptic as well. Therefore 
the Greek text must have been circulating in northern Africa in several cop-
ies at least, but we cannot tell how faithful they were to the original. The 
Coptic translations were discovered in 1945 as part of the Nag Hammadi 
library; and as it turned out, they included the closing prayer already 
known in Greek from the Papyrus Mimaut (see above). Close comparison 
shows that the Coptic version is considerably more precise and reliable 
than its parallel in the Latin Asclepius; and this conclusion is further con-
firmed by comparing the Greek fragments known from Christian writers 
with their parallels in the Latin and the Coptic versions.13 This means that 
we must be careful not to rely too easily on the Latin Asclepius for learn-
ing what Hermetic spirituality was originally all about. And there are even 
more reasons for caution. While the Latin treatise must have been written 
during the fourth century (in any case prior to Augustine’s City of God, 
composed after 410 ce, where it is quoted at length), our earliest surviving 
manuscripts are much more recent: they date from the eleventh century 
and are based on a lost “archetype” from the final decades of the ninth.
That is half a millennium after the text was written. Early on dur-
ing this period, some scribe must have miscategorized the Asclepius as 
a philosophical text by Apuleius (c. 124–170 ce), the Numidian author 
and Platonic philosopher from Madauros (nowadays M’Daourouch in 
Algeria) famous for his novel The Golden Ass.14 We should be grateful 
for this mistake, because otherwise our text – condemned as idolatrous 
by no one less than St Augustine15 – would certainly not have survived. As 
	11	 HHE I, 146–155; HHE II, 60–61.
	12	 At least according to Mahé: HHE II, 80.
	13	 Mahé, “La prière d’actions de grâces”; HHE I, 157–167 (closing prayer from PGM III, 
591–610; Ascl. 41; NH VI7); HHE II, 145–207 (parallel passages Ascl. 21–29; NH VI8; 
and Greek fragments inserted on pp. 185–187, 194–197, 206–207); conclusions in HHE 
I, 137–155; HHE II, 47–67.
	14	 Overview of manuscripts in Scott I, 49–51. For a useful narrative discussion (in Dutch) 
of the history of textual transmission, see Quispel, Asclepius, 251–258.
	15	 Augustine, De civitate Dei VIII; on Hermetism in Augustine’s oeuvre and his condemna-
tion of Hermes as an idolater based on the Asclepius, see Hanegraaff, “Hermetism” and 
discussion below, Chapter 10, pp. 131–132.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
52
it is, the Asclepius was passed on to posterity as the work of a respected 
Latin author, but it hardly survived unscathed. The original was written 
in a very difficult late Latin idiom heavily influenced by Greek grammar, 
and medieval scribes must have been making a string of “corrections” 
while copying (see Figure 3.1).16
As a result, already the ninth-century archetype seems to have been 
corrupt or mutilated “in a quite exceptional way,”17 and the process 
of adaptation and emendation continued through the eleventh-century 
manuscripts up to the first printed edition of 1469 – and indeed from 
there to all later editions and translations even up to the very present. In 
his notoriously problematic version of 1924, Walter Scott went to such 
extremes of “improving” the text that he ended up transforming “an 
obscure religious document into a clear philosophical treatise, which 
it had never been.”18 A quarter of a century later, Scott’s work was 
replaced by the much better edition of Nock and Festugière that has 
remained the standard reference for the Latin text. Only in 1991 did 
Claudio Moreschini publish a critical edition of the philosophical works 
attributed to Apuleius, including the Asclepius, in which he meticulously 
listed all previous attempts at improving or correcting the text.19
Figure 3.1: Manuscript timeline for the Logos Teleios and Asclepius
200
300
Logos Teleios
(lost)
400
Asclepius
(lost)
Fragm.
Christian
Authors
Fragm.
Papyrus
Mimaut
Fragm.
Nag Hammadi
800 900 1000 1100
Lost Archetype
1469
Manuscripts
First printed edition
Lost manuscripts
	16	 Quispel, Asclepius, 253.
	17	 Scott I, 50.
	18	 Quispel, Asclepius, 255. Scott’s editorial procedures have been universally condemned: 
see reviews by Cumont (1925), Nock (1925, 1927), Puech (1925), Reitzenstein (1925, 
1927), Rose (1925, 1926, 1936), Coppens, (1926), Riess (1926, 1927).
	19	 HT II; Moreschini, Apulei Platonici Madaurensis Opera quae supersunt, vol. 3, 39–86. 
See discussion by Quispel (Asclepius, 257–258), who describes Nock as a theologian 

The Presence of Gods
53
After this long and troubled history of textual transmission, it is per-
haps no surprise that the Asclepius as it has come down to us is anything 
but a clearly written and carefully edited treatise. It is quite disorderly 
and often repetitive,20 and we have no way of determining how faith-
ful our text is to the original Greek treatise that some Egyptian devotee 
penned down during the third century. In short, we are hearing echoes of 
distant voices and often cannot make out for sure what they were trying 
to say. Given these conditions, all modern translators have been strug-
gling to make sense of the Asclepius, with limited success.21 The only 
compensation is that an impressive apparatus of critical commentaries 
has been built up over time, providing a wealth of detailed references, 
explanations, and contextualizations for almost every single word or 
sentence. What, if anything, does this allow us to say about the spiritual 
perspectives of the followers of Hermes?
The Religion of the World
Famously, the author of the Asclepius describes Egypt as “the Temple of 
the Whole World.”22 He sees the country of the Nile as a sacred space 
	21	 Copenhaver’s literalist approach to translation (Cop, 67–92) often results in contorted 
sentences that make it hard to understand the meaning. Salaman’s translation (SA, 
53–98) is somewhat more readable but not always reliable in the details. Scott’s transla-
tion (Scott I, 286–377) is based on his defective edition of the Latin original. Nock and 
Festugière’s French translation (HT II, 296–355) is generally reliable and more easy to 
read, but one must beware of “Catholicizing” readings. Quispel’s Dutch translation is 
a disaster, as promoting his own personal beliefs and idiosyncrasies overwhelms any 
attempt at translating the original with a semblance of accuracy (Asclepius; but see the 
new edition, with a limited number of improvements by van den Broek, in HG, 191–227). 
Only the Italian translation by Moreschini and the German one by Holzhausen (More-
schini, Dall’ Asclepius, 121–201; CHD, 252–316; but see now also GWHT, 30–91) suc-
ceed in striking a good balance between textual precision and readability. Mahé provides 
the Coptic and Greek parallels to the Latin text in parallel columns, with two successive 
French translations of the Coptic (HHE I, 160–167; HHE II, 152–207; HT V, 122–132 
and 146–191); but note the many and often far-reaching differences between Mahé’s two 
French translations and between these and the English translations by Meyer published 
in collaboration with Mahé (Meyer, Nag Hammadi Scriptures, 422–423, 430–436).
	22	 Ascl. 24. The metaphor was popular and widely spread (RHT II, 233–238; refuting 
Cancik and Cancik-Lindemaier, “Tempel der ganzen Welt,” 49; cf. Fowden, Empire to 
Commonwealth, 46–47). For its centrality to Egyptian religion generally, see the splen-
did discussion in Assmann, Search for God, 17–52.
	20	 See e.g. Moreschini, Dall’Asclepius, 74–75; Parri, La via filosofica, 17–19.
rather than a philologist, questions his expertise in Late Latin, and argues that “as an 
editor he was conservative, which made him find recognition among reviewers who were 
conservative as well.”

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
54
designed for divine worship, a marvelous structure of supreme harmony 
and beauty, filled with countless sanctuaries that are made to accommo-
date the gods so as to make them feel at home. From a Hermetic treatise 
preserved by Stobaeus, we learn how literally this was taken:
[T]he most sacred land of our ancestors lies in the center of the earth, and the 
center of the human body is the precinct of the single heart, and the heart is 
the headquarters of the soul … The central region … is superior in itself and 
by virtue of all its inhabitants. In unremitting serenity it generates, adorns, and 
instructs.23
Thus Egypt, the temple of the soul, is located at the heart of the world. It is 
the home of divine instruction, the jewel of creation from which all good 
things flow. This “heartland” is of vital importance in the most literal 
sense, for the world (not just the earth, but the cosmos as a whole) is itself 
the body of a great living and breathing Being, a “second god” that can 
be apprehended by the senses and has been created or born from the ulti-
mate divine Source.24 The divinely appointed task of human beings is to 
take good care of the world and all living things; and since the Egyptians 
among all other human beings find themselves living in the most sacred 
space on earth, they have a special responsibility to act and behave with 
priestly devotion as servants of divinity. Human beings and the world 
are designed as “ornaments to one another,”25 for both are divine, and 
both have received all blessings from the great universal Source of Beauty 
and Goodness. Ultimately all human beings should devote themselves to 
a life of “continuous service.”26 The spiritual keynote of the Asclepius 
is an ethos of loving care for all of creation, in an attitude of gratitude, 
worship, wonder, and praise for the awesome divine Source of bounty, 
wisdom, and beauty from which all things have come. Of course it is 
conventional to refer to this ultimate Source as “God,” but in fact he is 
so far beyond language and human comprehension that no single name 
can possibly be appropriate:
He has no name, or rather, he has every name, because he is One and All; so 
that one would have to call all things by his name, or give him the name of all 
things. … Such a being, then, that cannot be perceived by the senses, is unlim-
ited, incomprehensible, and immeasurable. It cannot be captured, nor grasped, 
nor hunted down. Where it is, whither it is going, whence it has come, or how 
	23	 SH XXIV 13, 15 (Litwa transl.). See discussion in Bull, Tradition, 175–178.
	24	 Ascl. 8, 10.
	25	 Ascl. 10.
	26	 Ascl. 9–11.

The Presence of Gods
55
	27	 Ascl. 20 and 31. For the namelessness and ineffability of God, see also CH V 10; SH VI 
18; HF 3a; HV 2 (B).
it is, or what – all that is uncertain. For it moves in sovereign stillness, and this 
stillness moves in it, be it God, or eternity, or both, or one in the other, or both 
in both.27
The ultimate incomprehensibility and inexpressibility of divine reality, 
which is wholly beyond language and the senses, is a constant theme 
in the Hermetica.28 To minimize the risk of overdetermination by our 
common religious language, where the word “God” cannot but evoke 
specifically Christian associations and assumptions, I will give prefer-
ence whenever possible to terminology that emphasizes the functional 
role of this mysterious divine reality in the Hermetic imagination. Our 
texts leave no room for ambiguity in that regard: “God” for them 
means the ultimate creative or generative Source of all that is.29 What it 
really is, in and of itself, we do not know. How it can be both immobile 
and moving, eternal but in time, is beyond our comprehension. Its true 
nature and manner of operation cannot be explained. All we know is 
that there is this mysterious Source from which comes everything that 
we take to be real.
Typical for the Asclepius (and many other Hermetic texts) is that this 
generative Source is addressed with deep emotion, marked by attitudes of 
profound love and gratitude for all the blessings that it bestows. Hermes 
and his followers are glad to be alive in this beautiful world, grateful 
for all the opportunities they have been given, eager to participate in the 
splendid work of creation so as to further enhance its perfection: this 
	28	 For instance CH I 31, V 8; SH I 1 (“Noeticizing God is difficult; to speak of him is 
impossible even for a person capable of noeticizing”) and 2 (“I noeticize, Tat, I noeticize. 
That which cannot be expressed, that is God”); HD I 4. On the need for this neologism 
“noeticizing,” see below, Chapter 6 note 119. SH XI 2:1 and 11 imply that the immov-
able ultimate Source is even beyond “being” (cf. Litwa, Hermetica II, 69 note 6); see 
Chapter 9, p. 278 note 53.
	29	 Whether this religious conception is ultimately Egyptian or Greek may be left for special-
ists to decide, but it is clear that the author of the Logos teleios tried to discuss it in Pla-
tonic terminology. This is demonstrated by the remarkable fact that although Arthur O. 
Lovejoy never mentions the Hermetic literature in his classic The Great Chain of Being, 
his discussion of the “two Gods of Platonism” (ch. 2) nevertheless remains the most 
incisive and perceptive analysis of basic Hermetic theology known to me. The God of the 
Asclepius is the Platonic “generative source” (Lovejoy, Great Chain of Being, 45–55), 
but it is typical for this tradition that the author tries to combine it with its logical oppo-
site, the “self-sufficient absolute” (ibid., 24–45; see Ascl. 30, final lines). This fact alone 
undermines the old idea of a conflict between an “optimistic” and a “pessimistic” strand 
in the Hermetica: in fact, far from demonstrating the inconsistency or superficiality of 
Hermetic “philosophy,” this conflict is inherent in Platonism itself.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
56
is why they never stop expressing their gratitude to the divine Source 
of Being to whom they owe all these marvelous gifts. Because the great 
Source of all life and consciousness30 must itself be alive and conscious 
in some sense, it can be addressed in personal and even intimate terms as 
“Father” or “Lord” – but in an explicit rejoinder, Hermes points out that 
these are just terms of convenience, concessions to our limited minds. 
For reasons of mutual understanding, we need to use some kind of name; 
but in fact, any such spoken word is no more than just “a sound that is 
produced when our breath strikes the air.”31
As it turns out, terms such as “Lord” or “Father” are truly mislead-
ing, for the great Source cannot be reduced to one gender, as becomes 
perfectly clear from a remarkable and unique passage about the nature of 
creative fertility and divine procreation. The divine Source is both male 
and female:
He, the only one and all things, infinitely full of the fertility of both sexes 
and ever pregnant with his own will, always begets whatever he wishes to 
procreate. … And if you wish to see the nature of this mystery, consider the 
marvellous image of sexual intercourse between male and female. For when 
he [the man] reaches his climax, the semen is ejaculated. At that moment the 
female receives the strength of the male and the male receives the strength of 
the female, for that is what the semen does. … Each of them contributes to 
procreation.32
Human sexual intercourse is described as an admirable image of the never-
ending process of procreation by which the divine Source brings forth all 
of reality. The Asclepius says clearly that the internal male/female duality 
of the Source is mirrored on all levels of the reality to which it gives birth. 
The same creative polarity of male and female is found in the world as a 
whole and in each single human being as well: “each of the two sexes is 
full of generative power, and so is the connection of the two. Or to speak 
	31	 Ascl. 20.
	32	 NH VI8 65 (cf. the quite different version in Ascl. 20–21). That the Hermetic authors 
were interested in the biological aspects of sexual procreation is clear from SH XII, HO 
V 2–4, and HD X 1 (female “receptive fluid” versus masculine “seminal fluid”; see HG, 
442 and HT V, 270 with 271 note 179: for some reason Mahé prefers the reading “dis-
solution, corruption”).
	30	 In line with my basic approach to translation, I am using the word “consciousness” 
not as a direct rendering of a Latin, Greek, or Coptic term but according to our mod-
ern understanding of the word. This is important because some modern translations 
(e.g. Copenhaver) render nous as “consciousness.” I consider this misleading because all 
human beings have consciousness, whereas nous has a much more specific meaning, on 
which see above, pp. 12–16.

The Presence of Gods
57
	33	 Ascl. 21.
more truthfully: their union [of love] is something beyond comprehen-
sion.”33 “Love” is therefore understood in sexual and erotic terms, as 
the ultimate mystery of birth or creation: it is not the agapē (“charity”) 
of Christian language, and not exactly the Platonic erōs either, but the 
very power of life itself.34 This makes the spectacle of human intercourse 
a sacred mystery to those who understand its true nature; but it must be 
practiced behind closed doors because the ignorant would ridicule it and 
embarrass the lovers.35 Likewise, or so we may assume, while we are able 
to see the world that has come from the ultimate Source, we are barred 
from direct perception of the creative process itself.36
Hermes spends much energy trying to explain the nature of the world 
in philosophical terminology that would be understandable for an edu-
cated audience in the third century. With reference to theoretical concepts 
derived particularly from Platonism and the Stoa, he addresses such prob-
lems as the relation between time and eternity, space and place, spirit and 
matter, and the various genera and species of living beings.37 While these 
aspects have been discussed at great length by classicists and historians of 
philosophy, they are of somewhat limited importance for understanding 
the nature of Hermetic spirituality. The Asclepius is concerned much more 
with evoking an imaginal vision of reality, as a beautiful whole in which 
human beings have a meaningful role to play, than with resolving technical 
problems of natural philosophy and metaphysics. Judged by strictly philo-
sophical criteria, the text is a mediocre composition and an easy prey for 
critical deconstruction. It is full of minor contradictions and inconsisten-
cies, some of which may already have been there in the Greek original while 
	35	 Ascl. 21; NH VI8 65.
	36	 As will be seen (pp. 300–301 below), such direct perception is in fact granted to the 
reborn initiate who has attained conscious experience of the Ogdoad and the Ennead.
	37	 For detailed analysis of these dimensions, see (apart from the extensive notes to the great 
standard editions and translations) Parri, “Tempo ed eternità nell’Asclepius” and espe-
cially Parri, Via filosofica di Ermete; for an attempt to turn Hermetic speculation into a 
consistent “theological philosophy,” see Law, “Das Corpus Hermeticum,” vol. 1 (for a 
critique, see Hanegraaff, Review of Esteban Law).
	34	 According to Ascl. 1, “divine love” itself is speaking through the mouth of Hermes. 
Moreschini is right to call this statement “very obscure” (Dall’Asclepius, 125 note 3), 
but it seems that “love” (awkwardly translated as “Cupido”) is meant to refer not to 
the Platonic erōs but to the ultimate divine Source of life and creation: it is not the force 
of desire that impels us to move toward the eternal beauty of the forms or ideas but, 
on the contrary, a force that flows outwards from the eternal Source (consistent with a 
Iamblichean “embodied” perspective: see below, Chapter 4, pp. 106–112). For alterna-
tive solutions cf. CHD, 254 note 59.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
58
others may have been caused by faulty translations and the hazards of tex-
tual transmission. Unless a copy of the Logos teleios comes to light, these 
questions will never be resolved.38 For instance, what does the Asclepius 
mean by “genera”? Are they to be seen as taxonomical families subdivided 
into species, or as Platonic archetypes, or both?39 We do not know, but to 
be honest, it does not really matter all that much. The situation is similar 
to that of a modern spiritual treatise written for a “New Age” audience. 
Its author may be using concepts from natural science or psychology to 
express a spiritual worldview in terms that his readers will understand, 
but the result will be popularized science at best and will never satisfy true 
specialists of quantum mechanics or psychoanalysis.40 Likewise, there is no 
point to reading Hermes as if he were a professor of philosophy – judged 
by that yardstick he is certain to fail.41 Whatever value one may find in the 
Asclepius will have to do with its spiritual message.
That message concerns the nature of human beings and what it is 
that makes life meaningful. That man is referred to as the “third god” 
(the Source being the first, and the world the second)42 is far less signifi-
cant than it has seemed to countless scholars with Christian-trinitarian 
concepts in the back of their minds, for in fact it would be hard to find 
anything in Hermes’ universe that is not divine! Apart from the divine 
Source itself, the cosmos, the planets, the earth, and human beings are 
all referred to as gods at some point or other.43 Far more important – 
and rightly famous indeed – is the great emphasis that Hermes places 
on humanity’s middle status. Note that the passage in question nicely 
illustrates the pattern of contradictions and inconsistencies referred to 
above, for although man has been described as a “third god,” first we 
read that he is merely connected to the gods through his nous, and can 
“almost” (but not quite, presumably) attain divinity, whereas elsewhere 
we are told that precisely his share in mortality makes him even superior 
to the gods.44 Irritating as such statements might be from a philosophical 
or theological perspective, they merely illustrate the futility of reading the 
Asclepius from such perspectives at all.
	38	 On the disorder, repetitiveness, and lack of coherence of the text, see e.g. Moreschini, 
Dall’Asclepius, 74–75; Parri, La via filosofica, 16–17ff.
	39	 See remarks in SA, 51–52; cf. Cop, 217.
	40	 For many examples, see Hanegraaff, New Age Religion.
	41	 Cf. Moreschini, Dall’Asclepius, 78.
	42	 Ascl. 10. Cf. CH VIII 2, 5; X 14, 22; SH XI 2:6; HD I 1; VII 5.
	43	 See especially Ascl. 19, 23, 27 about different types of gods.
	44	 Ascl. 5; cf. 22 and NH VI8 68.

The Presence of Gods
59
Man is therefore a great miracle, a being to be admired and honoured.45 He 
passes into the nature of a god as if he is a god himself. He knows the nature 
of the daimons inasmuch as he recognizes himself to have come from the same 
source. He looks down on [despicit] the part of him that is human, because he 
has put his trust in the divinity of the other part. O, how much luckier a mixture 
human nature is! He is joined to the gods by a kindred divinity while looking 
down on the part in himself that is no more than terrestrial. All other beings, to 
whom he knows to be connected by heavenly disposition, he draws close to him 
in a bond of affection while raising his gaze to heaven. Thus he is placed in the 
happier state of a middle position: he values [diligat] what is below him and is 
valued by what is above him. He takes care of the earth, quickly mingles with the 
elements, and plumbs the depths of the sea with the sharpness of his mind. All 
things are open to him. Heaven does not seem too high, for he measures it as if 
from nearby with his soul’s sagacity. No misty air troubles the directedness of his 
soul, no dense earth obstructs his work, no depth of water impairs his view. He 
is everything and everywhere at the same time.46
Rather than with theology or philosophy, here we are dealing with a 
spiritual poetics.47 It is easy to see why this inspired passage made such 
an impression on later authors such as the Renaissance philosopher 
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola (1463–1494), who used it to exalt man 
as the only creature in the universe who can freely determine his own 
destiny for better or worse.48
In a later chapter we will look more closely at the importance of 
the faculty of imagination to how the spiritual Hermetica consider the 
relation between the divine Source, the world of appearances, and the 
	45	 See also HD IX 6.
	46	 Ascl. 6. On man’s unique status as an intermediary “double being,” see also Ascl. 8, 
22–23; cf. HD VI 1, VII 1–2, VIII 6 (“you have the power of not wanting to understand, 
you have the power to lack faith and be misled, so that you understand the contrary of 
what really is … Only the human being is a free living entity, only he has the power of 
good and evil”); cf. HV 1 (A). On the uniqueness of this message in late antiquity and 
its centrality to the Asclepius, see Moreschini, Dall’Asclepius, 93. I translate despicit as 
“looks down on” (rather than “despises”) and diligat as “values” (rather than “loves”) 
to suggest a predominantly spatial rather than moral perspective. For the final sentence, 
see discussion of CH XI below, pp. 215–219.
	47	 On the general importance of poeticity, see Hanegraaff, “Religion and the Historical 
Imagination.” For an important technical analysis, see Sándor, “Poeticity” (where I 
would opt for the second position outlined on p. 302: poeticity is not “epiphenomenal 
as far as human cognitive processes are concerned” but represents “a significant aspect 
of natural language processing in human minds”).
	48	 Pico della Mirandola, Oratio 1–6 (ed. Copenhaver, Magic and the Dignity of Man, 
459–461; cf. Borghesi, Papio and Riva, Pico della Mirandola: Oration, 108–117). For 
the actual ascetic and otherworldly rather than world-affirming message of Pico’s Oratio 
as a whole, see Copenhaver, Magic and the Dignity of Man.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
60
human  mind.49 At this point it is worth emphasizing that if human 
beings enjoy a uniquely central position in the Hermetic universe, their 
own center in turn resides in the divinity of their nous. As already indi-
cated in Chapter 1, the importance of nous to the Hermetica can hardly 
be overstated, but a proper understanding is frustrated at every turn 
by the virtual impossibility of translating it into modern languages. As 
formulated by Nicholas Banner, “modern English lacks a word that 
even approximates its meaning.”50 Nous is usually rendered as “mind,” 
“intellect,” or even “consciousness,” but all such translations are strictly 
incompatible with what the Asclepius says about it:
But the nous [sensus] – that heavenly gift enjoyed by man alone, and not by 
all but only by a small number, only those whose consciousness [mens] is such 
as to be capable of receiving such a great gift – this nous indeed enlightens 
human consciousness, like the sun enlightens the world, and even more so – 
for everything that the sun illuminates is regularly deprived of this light, by 
the interposition of the earth and the moon at night. But the nous, once it is 
joined with the human soul, becomes a single substance with her through an 
intimate fusion, so that such souls are nevermore obscured by the delusions of 
darkness.51
Clearly this means that nous cannot be identical to the common capacity 
of “mind,” “intellect,” or “consciousness” that all human beings have 
in common: for the latter, our passage uses a different word, mens.52 By 
	50	 Banner, Philosophic Silence, 187 (here more specifically about noēsis, the activity of 
nous). Banner’s subtle analysis of nous and noēsis in Plotinus (ibid., Chapter 6) is 
of the greatest relevance here. The founder of Neoplatonism was a native of Egypt 
born in Lycopolis around 205 (see MacCoull, “Plotinus the Egyptian?”), received 
his education in Alexandria and was alive during the period when the Logos teleios 
was written. The Hermetic references to nous read very much like simplified popular 
echoes of Plotinus’ technical discussions. It is crucial to distinguish between two ways 
in which nous is understood: ontologically as primary being (ousia, as distinct from 
the One above being: Banner, Philosophic Science, 183), and epistemologically as the 
capacity to access or comprehend that being though noēsis. However, these concep-
tual realms of ontology and epistemology “are simply not separate for Plotinus, [who 
may well have been] the earliest known philosopher fully to equate levels of being 
with states of consciousness. … Nous is an intelligible world, and also acts as a fac-
ulty of noēsis; but there is only one nous, which is both of these things” (ibid., 196; 
same point in Van den Kerchove, La voie, 29; I find Banner’s remarks apply equally 
to the Hermetica).
	51	 Ascl. 18.
	52	 Note that the standard Latin translation of nous in the Asclepius is sensus (Moreschini, 
Dall’Asclepius, 87, 107–108). Cf. Ascl. 32, where nous is distinguished not only from 
mens, but also from intellectus.
	49	 Below, Chapter 7, pp. 214–215.

The Presence of Gods
61
contrast, nous must refer to a higher capacity for noēsis that is active 
or awake in only a small minority of spiritually “enlightened” human 
beings.53 For them, it becomes like an interior sun that illuminates their 
soul so permanently and completely (through an “intimate fusion” that 
is never interrupted once it is there) that no room is left in it for delusion-
ary shadows.54 We are not dealing here with a spiritual elitism according 
to which only a few human beings are privileged to have nous and are 
capable of finding salvation. Rather, the universal divine Source has gen-
erously made the gift of nous available to all human beings,55 but the sad 
reality is that only few of them show any interest. Most people are living 
lives that make them simply incapable of receiving it: they allow them-
selves to be “deceived by delusionary images”56 rather than cultivating 
their potential for receiving nous. It should be noted that even if nous illu-
minates the inner universe of the human soul with divine light, still this 
does not necessarily imply perfect or absolute knowledge of transcendent 
reality in its true essence; rather, “human beings can perceive the things 
that are in heaven as if through a mist, in so far as the condition of the 
human nous permits it.”57 Direct and wholly unobscured knowledge of 
the absolute requires an extra step towards a unitive experience beyond 
logos and the internal senses, as will be seen.58
Terrestrial Gods
By no means should the Asclepius be understood as a mere theoretical 
exposition of how everything in the world is hanging together. Hermes’ 
instruction of Asclepius is marked by evident pedagogical concerns and 
a strong sense of moral urgency. Whenever he needs to discuss a particu-
larly difficult and sublime topic, he calls for divine assistance and inspira-
tion so that he may find the right words and his pupils may be able to 
understand them. Even so, he goes out of his way to instruct his audience 
at crucial spots to concentrate and pay close attention, because the true 
meaning of what he is about to tell them is so subtle that it can hardly be 
put into words at all.
	53	 Ascl. 18, 22; NH VI8 66.
	54	 Ascl. 18. On noetic enlightenment, see below, pp. 206–209.
	55	 As described paradigmatically in CH IV 4; see discussion below, pp. 149–151, 196–197.
	56	 Ascl. 7.
	57	 Ascl. 32.
	58	 See Chapter 9, pp. 297–302.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
62
Now be completely present, give me your whole attention, with all the under-
standing that you are capable of, with all the subtlety you can muster. For the 
teaching about divinity requires a divine noetic concentration if it is to be under-
stood. It is just like a torrential river, plunging headlong down from the heights 
so violently that with its rapidity and speed it outstrips the attention not only 
of whoever is listening but also of whoever is speaking. … If you pay attention, 
you will see what I mean. For what I am saying is sublime, and divine beyond 
the power of human minds and purposes unless you hear and receive with full 
attention the words that are spoken to you. Otherwise they will just fly or flow 
past you, or rather, they will flow back in themselves and return to the waters of 
their own source.59
So as readers we had better pay attention too. A particularly difficult 
moment occurs when Hermes remarks that humans imitate the supreme 
Creator by making terrestrial gods. Evidently Asclepius’s face betrays 
incredulity or even stupefaction about that statement, for Hermes inter-
rupts his discourse to address him directly: “Does that cause you to 
wonder,60 or do you too have doubts, like so many?” Asclepius readily 
admits to being confused and at a loss about what to say, but declares 
himself willing to be convinced.61 Clearly his puzzlement remains, for a 
similar prickly moment occurs not much further on, when an evidently 
still incredulous Asclepius blurts out “You aren’t talking about statues, 
are you?,” to which Hermes responds with evident irritation: “It is you 
who are talking about statues! Look at your incredulity… You are talk-
ing about beings endowed with nous and spirit [pneuma] and call them 
‘statues’…”62
What is going on here? These passages were written at a time when 
communities of Jews could be found throughout the Roman Empire 
	59	 Ascl. 3 and 19 (translation Kingsley, “An Introduction,” 38–39; because sensus in the 
Asclepius means nous, I prefer “divine noetic concentration” over “divine concentration 
of consciousness”). For similar expressions of urgency and demands for paying atten-
tion, as well as frequent calls on divine assistance, see Ascl. 8, 10, 21, 28, 32; CH XI 
18. The importance of these elements is noted by Kingsley, “An Introduction,” 33–35, 
38–39; Moreschini, Dall’Asclepius, 81; and Van den Kerchove, Hermès Trismégiste, 84.
	60	 Mirari: see discussion below, pp. 194–195. By writing “are you surprised?” (Cop, 80; 
cf. CHD, 248: “Wunderst du dich darüber?”), the implied contrast with the doubters 
is lost. In translating the Coptic parallel (ⲕⲣ̅ⲑⲁⲩⲙⲁ), Mahé had originally “t’étonnes-tu” 
(“are you astonished?” HHE II, 164), later “admires-tu cela?” (“do you admire that?” 
HT 5, 158). For reasons discussed below, I assume that the original Greek verb must 
have been θαυμάζειν and Hermes means to ask Asclepius whether he sees the animation 
of statues as the wondrous or admirable thing that it is.
	61	 Ascl. 23; cf. slightly different formulation in NH VI8 69.
	62	 NH VI8 69, parallel to the first lines of Ascl. 24. On the difference between the two ver-
sions, see CHD, 286 with note 144; my translation follows HHE II, 168. On Hermes’ 
irritation, cf. HHE II, 64, 98; cf. Van den Kerchove, La voie, 188.

The Presence of Gods
63
(although precisely not in Egypt between 117 and the later third cen-
tury)63 while Christians were increasing in their numbers with astound-
ing rapidity. At the very heart of their religious identity was a radical 
rejection of religious image worship, denounced by both traditions as the 
ultimate sin of “idolatry.” What really defined the radical or exclusive 
monotheism of Jews and Christians, even more than their belief in One 
God, was an absolute horror of worshiping “graven images” (Exodus 
20: 4–5) – this was the sin par excellence, the point on which no com-
promise could ever be possible, “the thick wall that separated the non-
pagans from pagans.”64 For Egyptians who adhered to traditional modes 
of worship, these polemics and attacks must have been profoundly puz-
zling and disconcerting. After all, their entire religion was grounded in a 
daily practice of reverent care for the gods who were living in the temple 
statues.65 What could possibly be wrong with such acts of piety and devo-
tion? Nevertheless, younger generations of Egyptians must have begun 
entertaining a somewhat different perspective. Influenced by the mount-
ing critique of image worship as well as philosophical doubts about the 
spiritual efficacy of material artefacts,66 they may no longer have been so 
sure about the value of those ancient rituals kept alive by elderly priests 
in the decaying temples of Roman Egypt.
Precisely this tension seems to be reflected in our discussion. Hermes 
speaks like an initiated temple priest familiar with the daily practice of 
ritual animation,67 whereas Asclepius sounds like an outsider. The tra-
ditional Egyptian practice of making images of the gods is under threat 
because of the people’s ignorance; but when the master refers to it in 
	63	 The Jewish revolt in Cyrenaia and Egypt in the spring of 116 ce led to a devastating 
campaign of ethnic cleansing under Q. Marcius Turbo in 116–117. Few Jewish indi-
viduals or families and no communities remained in the area until the later third cen-
tury (Kerkeslager, “Jews in Egypt and Cyrenaica”). Therefore Jewish influences on the 
Hermetica must almost always have been indirect, either based on sources predating the 
early second century or transmitted through Christians. I am grateful to Dylan Burns for 
his specifications on this point.
	64	 Halbertal and Margalit, Idolatry, 237; and see the classic discussion by Assmann, Moses 
the Egyptian, 1–22; cf. Assmann, Mosaische Unterscheidung. For a further develop-
ment, see Hanegraaff, “Trouble with Images”; Hanegraaff, “Idolatry.”
	65	 Moret, Rituel du culte divin journalier; and critical discussion in Lorton, “Theology of 
Cult Statues,” esp. 131–147.
	66	 Van den Kerchove, La voie, 185–187, 219. For another expression of Hermetic scepti-
cism about image-worship, see HD VIII 3.
	67	 Only initiated priests were allowed to approach the statues in their sanctuaries and per-
form the animation ritual: see inscriptions in the temple of Dendara, transl. in Derchain, 
“L’Atelier des Orfèvres,” 234; Van den Kerchove, La voie, 198.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
64
tones of praise, he is dismayed to notice that even his own pupil responds 
with doubt and incredulity – like “so many,”68 as he bitterly remarks. 
That Asclepius does not understand the true nature of the gods is con-
firmed later on, when he refers to them as mere “statues,” using Latin 
and Coptic words that suggest they are really just matter.69 On the con-
trary, Hermes exclaims, they are living beings endowed with nous and 
spirit! They deliver oracles and accomplish great wonders – for they are 
in fact gods. A very important point is being made here, but its subtlety 
has seldom been recognized, so Asclepius should perhaps be excused for 
missing it too.
The key lies in the embodied condition of human beings, the makers of 
those gods.70 We remember that when they were called a “great miracle,” 
that was because of their unique middle status in the universe: the fact 
that each man or woman is a “lucky mixture” of both spiritual essence 
and terrestrial matter. Hermes sees this human condition of embodiment 
not as a regrettable fall into materiality but as a divine gift. He makes a 
point of emphasizing that precisely their participation in mortal existence 
makes humans more than divine: they are superior even to the immortal 
planetary gods.71 Since the latter are made of nothing but celestial fire,72 
they are incapable of experiencing the full range of existence, whereas 
human beings can enjoy the best of both worlds. This makes them quite 
literally into “terrestrial gods” themselves, incarnated deities whose true 
vocation is to care for the world through their bodies while their spiritual 
part stays in communion with the divine source.73
	68	 I am indebted to the sensitive discussions by Van den Kerchove, La voie, 185–222. 
See ibid., 189–190 for the Logos teleios’ agenda of protecting a threatened practice 
and the connotations of “so many” (Latin, Coptic, and probable origin in Greek), 
which surely refers to the uneducated, ignorant, and impious rabble but may also be a 
semitism adopted by Christians as a self-designation. A further possible dimension to 
the confrontation between Hermes and Asclepius could be the transition from a tradi-
tional “locative” context represented by the former, with animated statues present in 
specific temple locations (cf. Bull, Tradition, 441), toward Hermetic spirituality as a 
more cosmopolitical, non-locative practice reflected in the perspective of the latter (cf. 
Chapter 2, pp. 45–46).
	69	 For the Coptic ⲧⲟⲩⲱⲧ, see HHE II, 228; for the Latin statuas, see Van den Kerchove, La 
voie, 188.
	70	 HHE II, 63–64.
	71	 Ascl. 22; NH VI8 68.
	72	 On “pure matter” as celestial fire, see HHE II, 219.
	73	 Probably the most distinctive characteristic of the Egyptian cult ritual is that it “was not 
conceived of as a communication between the human and the divine, but rather as an 
interaction between deities” (Assmann, Search for God, 49; emphasis in original).

The Presence of Gods
65
It is because they participate simultaneously in the world of matter 
and in the generative power of divinity that humans have the unique 
ability to imitate their creator74 by making, that is, “making alive” 
or “giving birth to,”75 gods in their own image. Those gods are really 
and quite literally “living beings endowed with nous and spirit” just 
like themselves. Thus we understand why Hermes is so irritated with 
Asclepius: to speak of the temple gods as mere “statues” is to miss the 
whole point. It is about as careless and ignorant as if he had described 
human beings as lifeless corpses! We also gauge the depth of the abyss 
between Hermetic spirituality and exclusive monotheism. That the ven-
eration of images could be construed as an attempt to direct human 
worship away from God and towards the work of one’s own hands is 
a thought that never seems to occur to Hermes – one imagines that it 
would have struck him as contrived and perverse, a malicious distor-
tion based on regrettable ignorance. Obviously the divine Source of All 
That Is need not fear competition from any other god; he is far above 
such petty feelings as jealousy or anger anyway, and cannot be hurt or 
offended by our actions; he just generously dispenses Life and Light 
to all beings no matter what happens, without the slightest reserva-
tion. Therefore if humans turn away from those blessings, they are not 
offending God. They are only hurting themselves by neglecting the very 
source of universal energy that sustains their own existence. As for the 
human activity of making gods and caring for them in the temples, this 
directly mirrors the divine activity of making humans and caring for 
them in the temple of the whole world. As such, it gives symbolic and 
ritual expression to the great work of embodying the spiritual on earth 
while spiritualizing terrestrial bodies.
That the gods were alive in their temples, delivering oracles and 
accomplishing great wonders such as sending dreams or healing ill-
nesses, was a perfectly common belief in ancient Egypt.76 It survived well 
into the Roman period, when reference began to be made to mysterious 
ritual practices known as “the telestic art,”77 concerned with animating 
	74	 The parallel is explicit at the end of Ascl. 23; NH VI8 69.
	75	 Assmann, Search for God, 46. A sculptor of divine statues was called a scnh, “one who 
makes alive” (Zandee, “Hermetisme en het oude Egypte,” 112).
	76	 E.g. Derchain, “L’authenticité,” 187; Iversen, Egyptian and Hermetic Doctrine, 37–38; 
Robins, “Cult Statues in Ancient Egypt”; Assmann, Search for God, 17–52.
	77	 Dodds, Greeks and the Irrational, 291–295; Boyancé, “Théurgie et télestique néopla-
toniciennes”; Lewy, Chaldaean Oracles and Theurgy, 495–496; Majercik, Chaldean 
Oracles, 26–27ff; Van Liefferinge, La théurgie, 92–97; Johnston, “Animating Statues”; 

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
66
statues so as to make them come alive.78 In a well-known passage, the 
Egyptian philosopher Plotinus79 referred to such practices in positive 
terms:
And it seems to me that the ancient wise men who made temples and statues 
so that the gods might be present in them, showed insight in the nature of the 
All. They perceived that since the soul is everywhere easy to attract, it would 
be secured most easily by constructing some appropriate receptacle capable of 
receiving some portion of it, something reproducing it or representing it and serv-
ing like a mirror to catch an image of it.80
In a fragmentary treatise of the Corpus Hermeticum, we find the same 
idea of statues as “mirrors” in which incorporeal entities can be reflected 
and caught (and whose images are reflected back to the incorporeal world 
in turn).81 Reflections in mirrors are transmitted by light, and in fact the 
animation of statues is described explicitly as a practice of illumination. 
The exact statements to which Asclepius responds with so much incom-
prehension can be translated most plausibly as follows:
Van den Kerchove, La voie, 201–222. Except for one isolated inscription from around 
500 bce, the adjective telestikos is not attested before Plato, Phaedrus 248e and 265b 
(Van den Kerchove, La voie, 203 note 86); by the second century ce, animators of 
statues could be referred to as telestai (Maximus of Tyrus, Philosophumena IV, 5: see 
Van Liefferinge, La théurgie, 94 with note 433); the exact term hē telestikē technē for 
animating statues was introduced by Proclus during the fifth century (Lewy, Chaldaean 
Oracles and Theurgy, 495–496). On the futility of trying to keep Neoplatonic telestikē 
apart from the Hermetic animation of statues (as nevertheless attempted by Van Lief-
feringe, who calls the parallels “almost perfect” but for some reason finds that fact “very 
troubling”: Van Liefferinge, La théurgie, 96–98), see e.g. Johnston, “Animating Stat-
ues,” 450–451; cf. Shaw, Theurgy and the Soul, 47 note 6, with reference to Derchain, 
“Pseudo-Jamblique.”
	78	 Johnston insists that no such practices are attested earlier than “very late antiquity” 
(“Animating Statues,” 447; same point in HHE II, 228) because they presuppose a cos-
mology with “firm boundaries between each of the different ontological realms” (ibid., 
459, cf. 446–450). Whether even the Egyptian “opening of the mouth” ritual has as little 
relevance to theurgy as she believes (ibid., 473–474) may be left for Egyptologists to 
judge; note that Bull is understandably puzzled by a Greek classicist agenda that seems 
to minimize Egyptian elements even in such texts as the Mithras Liturgy, “a papyrus 
found in Egypt, containing Old Coptic script, and referring extensively to Egyptian dei-
ties” (Bull, Tradition, 424–425 note 120).
	79	 Cf. above, note 50 (MacCoull).
	80	 Plotinus, Enn. IV.3.11.
	81	 CH XVII. See discussion in Lévy, “Statues divines”; Van den Kerchove, La voie, 199–
200. The embodiment of spiritual entities through mirrors and mirroring reflects a long 
speculative tradition (double pun intended!) with multiple applications in magical prac-
tice, from Plato and Aristotle through the Renaissance and early modernity. For a conve-
nient introduction to many relevant sources, see Kodera, “Stuff Dreams are Made Of.”

The Presence of Gods
67
Just as the Lord and Father (or God, as is his highest name) is the maker of the 
celestial gods, likewise man is the maker of the gods that are content to live close 
to human beings in the temples; and not only is he illuminated [or: are they illu-
minated], but he illuminates [or: they illuminate]82 in turn. Not only does [man] 
advance towards God, but he also makes gods.83
This language of illumination was current in discussions of the telestic 
art. For instance, Proclus writes that “by means of symbols and inef-
fable sunthēmata (“signatures”)84 [it] represents and makes statues suit-
able for becoming receptacles for the illumination of the gods,”85 and 
the empowerment or animation of images could be described as “spark-
ing” or “kindling into flame.”86 But the most important key passages 
are found in Iamblichus. Such is the power of the superior spiritual enti-
ties, he explains, that nothing can prevent them from being present in all 
things, very much like the rays of the sun. In a similar manner, the tran-
scendent universal light of the gods illuminates the totality of existence 
while nevertheless remaining fixed in itself.87
[Therefore they] illuminate even the lowest levels, and the immaterial [beings] are 
immaterially present in the material. So nobody should be surprised if we say that 
	82	 Both Nock and Festugière and Moreschini (Apulei … opera quae supersunt, vol. 3, 63) 
accept Paul Thomas’ emendation, based on a scribal correction, of the plural inluminan-
tur/inluminant to the singular inluminatur/inluminat (cf. Cop, 237). In this they are fol-
lowed by all modern translators except Mead, who translates “… the gods who, in the 
temples, suffer man’s approach, and who not only have light poured on them, but who 
send forth [their] light [on all]” (Thrice Greatest Hermes, vol. 2, 349). Since the statues 
are “illuminated” in both scenarios, the question is not crucial to my argument.
	83	 Ascl. 23 (emphasis added). For the delicate problems of textual reconstruction and trans-
lation here, see Van den Kerchove, La voie, 208–210. Contra Mahé (HHE II, 164–165, 
224) but in line with Festugière (HT II, 325 with note 193), she convincingly argues that 
behind the Latin illuminare must be a Greek word like φωτίζεσθαι. Similar conclusion 
in CHD, 285. Still, φωτίζεσθαι cannot be at the origin of the Coptic ϥⲧⲁϫⲣⲟ (thanks to 
Christian Bull, personal communication).
	84	 See below, p. 69.
	85	 Proclus, In Cr. 19.12 (see Johnston, “Animating Statues,” 454). For similar statements, 
see Proclus, Th. Pl. 70, 9f (see Lewy, Chaldean Oracles, 495).
	86	 Ζωπυρέω, ἀναζωπυρέω. See the fascinating ouphor (“opening of the mouth”) invocation 
of a miniature cult image in the form of a ring, described in PGM XII 270–350 (Moyer 
and Dieleman, “Miniaturization”, 59–66 with note 55; Ciraolo, “Warmth and Breath 
of Life,” 247–248; cf. Hopfner, Griechisch-Ägyptischer Offenbarungszauber, vol. 1, § 
808–809).
	87	 Iamblichus, Response to Porphyry I 9: “the single, indivisible light of the gods … is one 
and the same in its entirety everywhere, is indivisibly present to all things that are capable 
of participating in it, and fills everything with its perfect power,” thus illuminating “even 
precincts of sacred statues” (see below, Chapter 4, pp. 109–110; and cf. Athanassiadi, 
“Dreams, Theurgy and Freelance Divination,” 120).

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
68
there is such a thing as pure and divine matter [which] possesses a perfection that 
makes it suitable to receive the gods. … Observing this, and discovering in a gen-
eral manner the various receptacles convenient to each of the gods according to 
their specific characters, the theurgic art often combines stones, plants, animals, 
aromatic substances and other such sacred things that are perfect and similar to 
the gods, so as to compose from all of them a perfect and pure receptacle.88
This passage provides us with a close parallel to Hermes’ second, lon-
ger, and most controversial statement about the animation of statues. 
Having briefly discussed how ideal incorporeal realities are reflected in 
their bodily manifestations, towards the end of his discourse he again 
connects the double nature of human beings with their ability to make 
gods. This “god-making passage” is of the greatest importance, not only 
for its intrinsic interest and the light it throws on Hermetic practice, but 
also because its defense of “idolatry” would very much determine the 
fate of Hermetic spirituality after the rise of Christianity.89
[M]ore admirable than all other wonders is the fact that man has been able to 
discover the divine nature and make it manifest.90 As91 our ancestors were very 
much confused as to what the gods were all about (for they were unbelieving 
and inattentive to worship and divine reverence), they invented a procedure for 
manifesting the gods. They empowered their invention by adding a virtue drawn 
from the nature of the world, thus bringing both natures together and mixing 
	88	 Iamblichus, Response to Porphyry V 23. For additional references to “batons,” “peb-
bles,” and “incense,” see Shaw, Theurgy and the Soul, 167–168.
	89	 Hanegraaff, “Hermetism”; see below, Chapter 10, pp. 331–332.
	90	 I follow Salaman’s translation of efficere as “making manifest” (SA, 94; and unlike him, 
apply it to the following sentence as well), but not his suggestion that the divine nature 
discovered by man was specifically his own. The standard translation (see e.g. Cop, 90) 
says that man not only discovered the “divine nature” (divinam naturam, i.e. not “the 
nature of the gods”) but learned how to make it. This would imply a bizarre worldview 
reminiscent of Feuerbach but incompatible with everything the Asclepius and the rest of 
the Hermetica have to say about God, and is hard to reconcile with the later statement 
that humans “could not make souls”; it would, however, be congenial to Christian sus-
picions about the arrogance of idolaters who seek to reverse the order of creation and 
place themselves above God.
	91	 Quoniam presents translators with a major problem of interpretation. Augustine was 
happy to choose the most direct and literal translation and conclude from it that humans 
therefore created idols because they were unbelievers (De Civitate Dei VIII.24). As this 
is obviously incompatible with Hermes’ positive regard for the practice, many modern 
translators have tried to resolve the contradiction by interpreting quoniam as an indica-
tion of time: “they were unbelievers [etc.] … but then they discovered…” My translation 
avoids an argument of direct causality (“unbelief leads to idolatry”) while mitigating 
this suggestion of a sudden revolution; rather, it simply emphasizes that the discovery 
was beneficial and welcome as a corrective (similar solution in Mead, Thrice-Greatest 
Hermes, vol. 2, 381; CHD, 309; Van den Kerchove, La voie, 194; GWHT, 85).

The Presence of Gods
69
them. As they could not make souls, they evoked the souls of daimons or angels, 
drawing them into these images through sacred and divine mystery rites, so that 
these idols could have the power to produce good and evil. … The terrestrial and 
material gods are easily angered, because human beings have made and com-
posed them of both natures. …
[Asclepius:] What is the quality of those gods that are called terrestrial, 
Trismegistus?
[Hermes:] It consists of herbs, stones and aromatic plants that contain a natural 
divine power. They are entertained by frequent sacrifices, hymns, praises, and 
lovely sounds in a mode that reflects the divine harmony, so that the part in them 
that is celestial, which through constant celestial practice was drawn into the stat-
ues, may be content to endure the presence of humanity and remain there for a 
long period of time. This is how man fashions the gods. … The gods down here 
all have their own specific assignments and are helping us out in a spirit of friendly 
communion, whether by giving specific prophecies through lots and divination, 
by foreseeing specific things, or assisting us appropriately in our human affairs.92
Exactly as in Iamblichus’ theurgy, the natural virtue or power that allows 
statues to be illuminated by the gods resides in a mixture of “herbs, 
stones and aromatic plants.” This, then, was Iamblichus’ “perfect and 
pure receptacle,”93 so perfect that it could receive and transmit the light 
of divinity. There is general agreement among specialists that such mate-
rials were supposed to work through the universal power of sympathy. In 
theurgical contexts, herbs, stones and aromatic plants were referred to as 
“material sunthēmata” or signatures;94 they should be seen as being part 
of great “chains” (seirai) of creatures and objects ranging from the high-
est to the lowest levels of the universe that were all intimately connected, 
not through links of instrumental causality but because they participated 
in a common ontological essence that they reflected and could make pres-
ent each on their own appropriate level.95 This theory gave philosophi-
cal justification to the view that specific organic or inorganic substances 
could contain a higher divine “virtue” and render it present in a specific 
location such as a statue in a sanctuary.
	92	 Ascl. 37–38.
	93	 Iamblichus, Response to Porphyry V 23 (see quotation above).
	94	 Shaw, Theurgy and the Soul, 162–169.
	95	 E.g. Johnston, “Animating Statues,” 454–458; cf. Van den Kerchove, La voie, 203–207. 
Johnston points out that symbola and sunthēmata are virtually synonymous terms in 
these contexts, and to understand them we need to “forget the connotations of our own 
word ‘symbol’” (ibid., 454; see Struck, Birth of the Symbol). To avoid those associa-
tions, I follow Shaw (Theurgy and the Soul, 162–228) and give preference to the latter 
terminology. On theoretical distinctions between correspondences and occult causality 
as distinguishable from instrumental causality, see Hanegraaff, Western Esotericism, 
124–128.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
70
However, we are not just dealing with theories but primarily with 
practice. How do we explain that priests and philosophers were con-
vinced that they had witnessed temple statues become alive and lighten 
up with the power of the gods? First of all, in our attempts to under-
stand the animation of images, we are mentally handicapped by what 
is known as the “museum effect.”96 Our culture predisposes us to see 
god statues as inanimate “art objects” displayed in artificial environ-
ments far removed from their original setting: “standing on pedestals by 
themselves, unadorned, carefully spotlighted by track lights, against a 
subdued background.”97 But that is not how they would appear in their 
original cultic settings, where priests and devotees would typically inter-
act with them in a much more physical and personal manner – touching, 
anointing, bathing, dressing, adorning, or feeding them, while speaking 
to them and entertaining them with songs and instrumental music.98 
Furthermore, as known to any cathedral visitor today, even such a 
familiar statue as the Virgin Mary in a side chapel, placed in a devo-
tional setting of silence and respect enhanced by incense and candles, 
can dominate its immediate environment in such a powerful and natural 
manner that even determined unbelievers may find it hard to avoid the 
sense of some kind of “presence” over there on the altar. We are dealing 
here with a pre-rational phenomenon of “primary response” that makes 
it easy for human beings to invest god images with a mysterious power 
of life and agency, particularly in ritual settings that impinge directly on 
the senses of sight, hearing, and smell simultaneously.99
	96	 Alpers, “Museum as a Way of Seeing”; Davis, Lives of Indian Images, 23.
	97	 Davis, Lives of Indian Images, 17; and cf. ibid., 23: “Culturally heirs of the Israelite proph-
ets who had disdained the religious idols of neighboring tribes (and of their own past) as 
false, and Cartesian in their ontological outlook, Western museum goers understood these 
old images from the past of another culture as fundamentally inanimate objects.”
	98	 Cf. Assmann, Search for God, 47: “the priest awakened, greeted, worshiped, purified, 
anointed, and dressed the cult statue and provided it three times daily with the huge 
variety of foods of the daily offerings.” Since the logic of human “primary response” to 
images is similar across cultures, it is instructive to draw analogies with contemporary 
cases of image worship for instance in Indian contexts: see Davis, Lives of Indian Images, 
19; or Waghorne and Cutler, Gods of Flesh, Gods of Stone (with a particularly strik-
ing cover image). The ritual “establishment” (pratist..hā) of images as described by Davis 
(Lives of Indian Images, 33–37) is remarkably close to what we know of the “telestic 
art” of animation. Śrīvaisn
. .avas have a special ontological category for the god’s “pure, 
luminous, immaterial matter” (śuddhasattva; cf. Iamblichus’ “pure and divine matter”) 
and animation is often thought of in terms of illumination or kindling a fire (ibid., 34).
	99	 Hanegraaff, “Trouble with Images,” 126–131, with a distinction between “primary” 
and “secondary” response that can be either positive or negative, resulting in four pos-
sible combinations. See also e.g. Freedberg, Power of Images, 1.

The Presence of Gods
71
Still, even this does not seem to be the whole picture, for we are told 
that sometimes the gods made spectacular appearances right in front of 
the theurgist. Such theophanies could be awe-inspiring, as explained by 
Sarah Iles Johnston:
Iamblichus tells us that when the gods appear directly, they shine with a formless 
brilliance greater than any earthly light that moves more rapidly than the human 
intellect, although the god himself remains motionless. … The brilliance of this 
light, morever, can be tolerated only briefly by terrestrial eyes – and even when 
it enters the eyes, such light is actually “seen” only by the soul. Although a brief 
encounter with divinity in this form could help purify the soul of the theurgist 
and enhance his long-term health, he was enfeebled and struggled to breathe 
while experiencing it.100
So what was going on here? The most reasonable explanation for such 
radical experiences leads us back again to the herbs and aromatics that 
were discussed in Chapter 2 and are mentioned both by Iamblichus and 
the Asclepius explicitly in the context of statue animation. In a char-
acteristically thorough discussion, Friedrich Pfister pointed out that 
“Occasionally, fumigations also served to arouse religious hallucina-
tions and ecstatic states of consciousness” (emphasis in original),101 and 
Georg Luck has drawn the logical conclusion: most plausibly, “incense 
was nominally offered to the deities but effectively inhaled and experi-
enced by the priests and some of the people.”102 For instance, the medical 
authority Galen reports that “Enthusiasm is a state of ecstasy produced 
in some people from smoke in the sanctuaries, when they see appari-
tions, listening to drums or flutes or cymbals.”103 Moreover, Iamblichus 
mentions not just fumigations inhaled by practitioners, but also unspeci-
fied substances that (alongside ritual incantations and rites of conjunc-
tion practiced in darkness) should be swallowed or ingested to make the 
	100	 Johnston, “Animating Statues,” 461–462 (description based on various passages 
throughout Bk II of Response to Porphyry). Johnston again asks the crucial question 
“what was really going on?” (ibid., 466; cf above, Chapter 2, note 72) but does not 
seem to answer it conclusively.
	101	 Pfister, “Rauchopfer,” 283, with references to twelve classical sources. For abundant fur-
ther source references to “power plants,” fumigations, and their relation to statue anima-
tion, see Hopfner, Griechisch-Ägyptischer Offenbarungszauber, vol. 1, esp. § 386–387, 
395–396, 464–472, 515–516, 530, 539–551 (with exact discussions of specific plants and 
substances), 808–809. Cf. Aufrère, “Parfums et onguents liturgiques,” 30, 53.
	102	 Luck, “Psychoactive Substances,” 482; cf. Aufrère, “Parfums et onguents liturgiques,” 40.
	103	 Galen, On Medical Terminology 187, XIX, 462 K, as quoted in Luck, “Psychoactive 
Substances,” 484, who discusses the textual corruptions (Hopfner’s correction of epi 
to hupo seems logical; Rohde’s correction of sumbolon to kumbalon makes sense given 
the mention of drums and flutes).

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
72
divine light manifest.104 The conclusion, then, is quite straightforward. 
Rather than suspecting our sources of serious irrationality and insane 
delusions (assuming that they must have kept imagining things that we 
know to be impossible) or systematic deception (assuming that they must 
have made it all up), it is much more reasonable to assume that sometimes 
they really did see statues lighten up and witnessed other awesome lumi-
nous phenomena – not because they were deluded or crazy but because 
they were under the influence of psychoactive agents that we know to 
be capable of creating such effects.105 Whether this dimension was also 
present in the ritual practices alluded to in the Asclepius is impossible 
for us to establish, but we can say with confidence that it was part of the 
complete scope of what “statue illumination” could mean in the context 
of the telestic art.
The Age of Darkness
Having to dwell in material bodies was never easy for the gods. The 
impurity of their surroundings made them irritable and quick to anger. 
To endure such uncomfortable living conditions, to stay where they were 
and remain willing to assist humanity in caring for the world, they had 
to be entertained and kept happy “by frequent sacrifices, hymns, praises, 
and lovely sounds” reminiscent of their celestial origin. This is what we 
read in Asclepius 37–38. The implication is clear. If those sacred prac-
tices are ever neglected or abandoned, the gods will surely leave their 
statues and return to where they came from, leaving nothing behind but 
empty shells.106 From a traditional Egyptian perspective as represented 
	104	 Iamblichus, Response to Porphyry III 14. Saffrey and Segonds translate καταπόσεις 
τινῶν as “certaines drogues” in both instances (Iamblichus, Réponse, 99–100); Clarke, 
Dillon and Hershbell (Iamblichus, Iamblichus: De mysteriis, 153, 155) translate the 
first instance as “potions” but unfortunately obscure the meaning in the parallel second 
instance by writing “objects that are akin to the gods who are about to intervene.” 
That the light was “‘seen’ only by the soul” (Johnston, “Animating Statues,” 462) is 
consistent with Iamblichus’ emphasis on the faculty of imagination (το φανταστικόν, 
φανταστικὴν δύναμιν) “that is woken up … by the gods to modes of apparition that are 
totally different from what human beings are accustomed to.”
	105	 For an excellent phenomenological analysis from a perspective of cognitive psychology, 
see Shanon, Antipodes of the Mind, esp. the chapter “Light” (ibid., 273–283); for the 
imputation of “irrationality” resp. insanity, see Hanegraaff, “Psychedelica.”
	106	 Van den Kerchove, La voie, 217; Assmann, Search for God, 48. Contrary to e.g. Quack 
(“Der Asclepius,” 265) I therefore see a clear connection between the discussion of the 
statues and the famous “apocalyptic” passage that follows.

The Presence of Gods
73
here by Hermes Trismegistus, such an event would be not just regrettable 
but simply catastrophic.107
To really understand why this is so, we need to make an effort of 
the imagination. What were the gods all about? What was their essen-
tial function? Living deep inside the darkest interior of their temples, 
enclosed in very small spaces and protected from outside contamination 
by many protective layers, they have been compared to the pulsating 
energy at the core of modern nuclear reactors.108 Their enormous and 
potentially deadly power had to be carefully contained and managed by 
trained professionals, the priests, so that it could be safely channeled 
and distributed towards the outside world. Without this beneficial life–
giving energy at its very core, the social organism would fall apart.
According to the unknown author of the Logos teleios, that is pre-
cisely what he sees happening in his own time. Through the persona of 
Hermes Trismegistus we find ourselves listening to the voice of a third-
century Egyptian who knows that the culture he cares for is dying. With 
deep sorrow and resignation, he tells his pupils that they are the last 
generation to be in touch with the truth:
After us, no one will have that simple love, the love of wisdom, that consists only 
in knowing the divinity through frequent contemplation and sacred reverence 
… The people who will come after us will be deceived by cunning sophistry and 
estranged from the true, pure, and sacred love of wisdom.109
Very soon there will be literally nobody left on earth who still knows 
how the gods are to be venerated and cared for. When that moment 
comes, what will happen? It makes perfect sense that immediately 
	107	 Assmann, Search for God, 17.
	108	 This metaphor comes from Assmann and rests on the very architecture of temples such 
as that of Horus at Edfu: “From the exterior to the interior, the rooms become ever 
smaller, while the floor becomes higher and the ceiling lower. Corresponding to the 
diminution of space is an increasing darkness. The courtyard, which is flooded with 
light, is followed by the crepuscular Hall of Appearance. The inner rooms lie in deep 
darkness …” (see ibid., 31–32). Hence the invisible divine light is contained in the tem-
ple’s inner darkness, while the visible daylight outside is relatively empty of its presence.
	109	 Ascl. 12, 14. Van den Broek remarks that “the author seems to have forgotten for a 
moment that this conversation is supposed to take place in an ancient past” (HG, 518 
nt 407). I would turn the argument around, reading the Asclepius as reflecting real 
conversations of the kind that must have taken place between Hermetic teachers and 
their pupils, but slightly fictionalized so as to enhance their authority and their claim 
to universal validity (“these are not just my words but those of Hermes himself”). In 
this context, see also Van den Kerchove’s reference to the rhetorical genre of Progym-
nasmata as a possible background to how figures such as Hermes, Tat or Asclepius are 
presented as models to be imitated (Hermès Trismégiste, 69–70).

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
74
after introducing the animation of temple images to a still incredulous 
Asclepius, Hermes continues by describing the terrible consequences 
that follow when the daily practice of veneration and divine worship is 
neglected or even abandoned altogether. This is perhaps the most famous 
passage from the entire Hermetic literature. It has been referred to as an 
“apocalypse” and a “prophecy,” but neither of those labels is entirely 
right.110 Technically we are reading a “prediction” of events that still 
lie in the future, but in fact it is clear that the author speaks from per-
sonal experience. What we are reading may be described as the vivid and 
almost visionary nightmare of a Hermetic devotee who is watching help-
lessly how his spiritual world is falling apart:
All that is divine will depart from Egypt and return to heaven, and Egypt will 
be a widow, abandoned by the gods. Foreigners will enter Egypt and rule it. 
Egypt, and the Egyptians most of all, will be prohibited from worshipping God, 
and more than that, whoever will be found honoring and serving God will be 
severely punished. In those days, this land that is reverent beyond all other lands 
will become irreverent. It will no longer be filled with temples but with tombs, 
and no longer with gods but with corpses. O Egypt, Egypt, your divinities will 
be like fables, and so will be your divine modes of worship. … Barbarians will 
surpass you in reverence, o Egyptian, whether they are Scyths, Indians, or others 
of that kind. … And you, o river, a day will come when you will be filled with 
blood more than with water. Corpses will be piled up higher than the banks, and 
the dead will be mourned less than the living. … Egypt, the lover of the gods, the 
home of the gods, the school of divinity, will become the picture of irreverence. 
That day, the universe will no longer be admired … but it will risk becoming a 
burden to all people. So they will hold it in contempt, this magnificent world 
made by God, this incomparable work … Shadows will be preferred over light, 
death will be preferred over life. Nobody will raise his gaze to heaven. The rever-
ent man will be considered crazy, the irreverent man will be honoured like a sage, 
the coward will be considered strong, and the good man will be punished like a 
criminal. As for the soul and all that is related to it … all that will be held laugh-
able and ridiculous. Believe me: to be devoted to the religion of nous will even 
constitute a capital crime. A new legal system will be created, with new laws. …
And they will leave, the benevolent gods. But the wicked angels will remain 
with human beings to induce them, miserable wretches, to all kinds of evil excess: 
wars, looting, deceit, and all that is contrary to the nature of souls. Then neither 
will the earth be stable, nor will the sea be sailed, nor will heaven and the move-
ments of the stars keep their balance. Every divine voice will be forced to fall 
silent, the fruits of the earth will rot, the earth will no longer be fertile, and the 
very air will hang heavy in lifeless torpor.111
	110	 Mahé, HHE II, 68–97; Wigtil, “Incorrect Apocalyptic,” esp. 2288–2289.
	111	 Ascl. 24–25; NH VI8 70–73. My concern here is with the basic content of this passage 
rather than exact textual comparison between the Coptic and Latin versions. I broadly 
follow the former, but take inspiration from the latter for a few specific sentences.

The Presence of Gods
75
It is not hard to place this description in the context of real life in Egypt 
under the impact of the third-century crisis. The country had of course 
been “flooded by foreigners” for centuries, ever since the conquest by 
Alexander and the emergence of a cosmopolitan Hellenistic culture radi-
ating from Alexandria. Moreover, the final decades of the third century 
were marked by rampant violence and bloodshed, with Queen Zenobia’s 
armies entering the country from the east and Upper Egypt suffering a 
series of invasions by nomadic tribes from Libya in the west and Nubia 
in the south.112 Meanwhile the Roman authorities had always been treat-
ing Egyptian religion with contempt as mere “magical superstition” and 
introduced policies and restrictions that caused the priesthood to lose its 
prestige and social relevance. As the economy declined during the cata-
strophic third century, temples became dependent on the diminishing 
finances of local councils. Thus while the empire descended into chaos, 
the infrastructure of Egyptian religion fell apart.113 Such developments 
were obviously traumatic for Egyptians who still tried to hold on to their 
ancestral traditions.
As for the “new laws” and “prohibitions” that are mentioned twice 
in the Asclepius fragment, they most probably have to do with an impe-
rial decree issued in 199 ce by the Roman prefect of Egypt Q. Aemilius 
Saturninus. It imposed capital punishment on anybody found guilty of 
practicing divination, consulting oracles, engaging in public processions 
of cult images, or claiming higher knowledge based on “written doc-
uments supposedly granted in the presence of a deity.”114 The decree 
was publicly displayed in every Egyptian city or village and must have 
been deeply intimidating to practitioners of traditional Egyptian religion, 
temple priests in particular. It is true that this attempt to put an end to 
Egyptian “superstition” seems not to have been very successful115; but 
whatever its effectiveness, such an imperial decree meant that from the 
beginning of the third century onwards, not just ritual worship of tem-
ple images but even divinely inspired discourses such as we find in the 
Asclepius were officially illegal and punishable by death.
	112	 Lindsay, Origins of Alchemy, 339–340, with many source references on p. 429 note 23.
	113	 Assmann and Frankfurter, “Egypt,” 161–162; Frankfurter, “Religious Practice and 
Piety,” 321.
	114	 Bull, Tradition, 447–449. See Parássoglou, “Prefectural Edict”; Rea, “New Version”; 
Ritner, “Egyptian Magical Practice,” 3355–3358; Moyer, “Thessalos,” 49–50; Moyer, 
Egypt, 255 note 190.
	115	 Lane Fox, Pagans and Christians, 213; Frankfurter, Religion in Roman Egypt, 153–156.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
76
No wonder then that the author of the Logos teleios believed the end 
was near. Under such terrible conditions, Egypt could no longer fulfil 
its sacred mission of caring for the gods in their temples, and therefore 
the gods were abandoning humanity. Seeing that foreign invaders were 
plunging Egypt into chaos and ruthless criminals could pollute the Nile 
with the blood of their victims, he must have drawn a perfectly logical 
conclusion: the dramatic end of Egyptian religion that had long been 
predicted in visionary prophecies was happening right here and right 
now.116 In fact he was not wrong. What had begun under the Romans 
was about to be finished by the Christians – hence the continuing rel-
evance of the Hermetic prediction to those who would translate it into 
Latin and Coptic during the fourth century.117 As the country that once 
thought of itself as the “temple of the whole world” was turned into a 
desolate graveyard filled with tombs and corpses, the world was entering 
an age of utter darkness.118 Henceforth deprived of any spiritual protec-
tion, human beings would be exposed helplessly to the malice of demons 
or wicked angels bent on poisoning their souls through the passions of 
the body. What, if anything, could still be done? The way of Hermetic 
spirituality sought to answer that question.
	116	 For earlier literary models, some of which were probably known to the author of the 
Logos teleios and may have influenced his imagination, see HHE II, 72–90; Quack, 
“Der Asclepius.”
	117	 As was to be expected, Christian authors since the fourth century began interpreting 
Hermes’ prediction, with obvious glee and Schadenfreude, as prophesying the victory 
of Christianity over pagan idolatry; and the argument made an impression on non-
Christians as well (van den Broek, “Hermetic Apocalypse”). Hermes’ prediction makes 
no reference to Christians and is unrelated to the systematic “holy war on idolatry” that 
would get underway after Constantine the Great; yet even as recently as 1986, Garth 
Fowden could still write that this basic fact “has not hitherto penetrated the scholarly 
mind” (Egyptian Hermes, 39).
	118	 At the end of that age, God will finally restore the world to its ancient beauty, as briefly 
announced toward the end of Ascl. 26 / NH VI8 74.

