ather, they tell us what 
devotees of Hermes were supposed to learn and what they should expect 
to happen if they managed to get it all right.
	12	 Bull, Tradition, 427–455.
	11	 The formulation comes from Fowden, Egyptian Hermes, 72.

Through a Glass Darkly
123
At the Mercy of Scribes
But can we trust our sources to provide reliable information at all? The 
earliest manuscripts of what modern scholars since Reitzenstein call the 
“Corpus Hermeticum”13 date from as late as the fourteenth century – that 
is more than a millennium after the originals were written down! They all 
consist of seventeen treatises, except for the most influential of them all 
(Laurentianus 71.33) that was used by Marsilio Ficino (1433–1499) for 
his famous Latin translation published in 1471 and contains only CH I–
XIV. A series of further manuscripts, some more complete than others, date 
from the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.14 One of the complete versions 
was used by Ficino’s contemporary, the poet Lodovico Lazzarelli (1447–
1500), for his Latin translation of the remaining treatises, CH XVI–XVIII.15 
However, all these different manuscripts on which our Corpus Hermeticum 
is based are derived from just one textual original, or archetype, which is 
no longer extant and must already have been in a very bad condition at the 
time it was copied.16 Reitzenstein’s sobering remarks are worth quoting:
We owe the preservation of the Hermetic corpus to one single manuscript, redis-
covered in a sad state during the eleventh century. Entire quires and pages were 
	13	 Reitzenstein, Poimandres, 319ff (“das Hermetische Corpus”) and 380 (“Corpus 
Hermeticum”).
	14	 Overview in HT I, xi–xii. We should add the manuscript Clarkianus 11 discovered in 
Oxford (Bodleian library) by Mahé and Paramelle and published by them in 1991 (Para-
melle and Mahé, “Extraits hermétiques”). Dated perhaps somewhat earlier than the 
other manuscripts (thirteenth or fourteenth century), it contains fragments of CH XI 
(final passage) to XIV, then some of the Definitions previously known only in Armenian, 
followed by CH XVI and finally some additional Hermetic passages that had not been 
known before. Because they sometimes give a better version than the standard edition 
published by Nock and Festugière, they cannot come from the lost archetype on which 
the other CH manuscripts are based but must depend on a different, parallel source that 
kept the same order of succession at least as far as CH XI–XVI are concerned (Van den 
Kerchove, La voie, 149).
	15	 Hanegraaff and Bouthoorn, Lodovico Lazzarelli. Note that Adrien Turnèbe composed 
a “CH XV” from some excerpts of Stobaeus in the first edition of the Greek text; but 
while later editors kept his numbering, this fifteenth treatise was thrown out again (see 
e.g. van den Broek, “Hermetic Literature I,” 489). Lazzarelli’s translation was published 
posthumously by Symphorien Champier (1507) and consists not just of CH XVI (as 
assumed by Van den Kerchove, La voie, 148; Van den Kerchove, Hermès Trismégiste, 
18; Moreschini, “Rezeption,” 295) but of all three treatises presented as one continuous 
text titled “Diffinitiones Asclepii” (Champier, “Commentarium,” 251–259: CH XVI = 
pp. 251–255 l. 10, CH XVII = 255 l. 10–23, XVIII = 255 l. 23–259 l. 10).
	16	 For the realities of textual transmission, including the common practice of discarding 
originals after a copy had been made in minuscule script, see the excellent discussion by 
Reynolds and Wilson, Scribes and Scholars, 44–79, here 60.

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
124
missing, both at the beginning (after ch. I) and at the end (after XVI); and on 
the pages that were preserved, parts of the text, especially in the final third, had 
become unreadable.17
Most scholars assume that this original Corpus can be dated to the eleventh 
century and must have been available to the great Byzantine philosopher 
Michael Psellos. The chief argument is that two of the fourteenth-century 
manuscripts (Parisinus Gr. 1220 and Vaticanus Gr. 951) contain some 
highly polemical comments that are attributed to him.18 They refer to 
CH I 18 and basically accuse Hermes, “this sorcerer” (goēs), of plagia-
rizing Moses. Technically this is no proof that Psellos knew our Corpus 
Hermeticum as a compositional unity, for these remarks are attributed to 
him indirectly about three centuries after his death and refer only to the 
first treatise.19 Whatever may be the truth of Psellos’ involvement, and 
at whatever moment between late antiquity and the fourteenth century 
our Corpus may have been put together in more or less its present shape, 
three facts are undeniable. First, there is no proof that these seventeen 
treatises were originally part of one “Hermetic corpus”; it is only with 
Ficino’s Latin translation (1471) that the collection was presented as if 
it were a book with seventeen (still unnumbered) chapters. Second, we 
have no reason to attribut