f the gods, theōn 
erga). The term was meant to make a specific point: although theurgic 
rites were performed by human beings, it was the gods themselves who 
directed the work.51 Rather than seeing such practices as attempts by 
“magicians” to gain power and control over invisible entities such as 
gods or demons, it is much more correct to see them as ritual procedures 
whose goal was to create suitable conditions for the gods to manifest 
themselves. The ritual setting had to be right, you had to follow the right 
procedures, and you had to be in the right mental state. Fortunately, to 
create such conditions you did not need to start from scratch or proceed 
by trial and error on your own, for there were ancient traditions and 
	49	 On the ochēma-pneuma, see Kissling, “ΟΧΗΜΑ-ΠΝΕYΜΑ of the Neoplatonists”; Lewy, 
Chaldaean Oracles, 178–184; Finamore, Iamblichus and the Theory of the Vehicle; Majer-
cik, Chaldean Oracles, 31; Dodds, “Appendix II”; Johnston, “Fiat Lux,” 11–12; Shaw, 
Theurgy and the Soul, 51–53; Shaw, “Theurgy and the Platonist’s Luminous Body.”
	50	 Iamblichus, Response to Porphyry III 14. The ochēma-pneuma was regarded as the seat 
of both sensation and imagination (Majercik, Chaldean Oracles, 32; Kissling, “ΟΧΗΜΑ-
ΠΝΕYΜΑ,” 321, both with reference to a passage in Simplicius, In libros Aristotelis De 
Anima commentaria, 214).
	51	 Shaw, “Theurgy,” 1 (but cf. Louth, “Pagan Theurgy,” 434: Iamblichus used the term 
as more or less equivalent to mustagogia, hiera hagisteia, thrēskeia, hieratikē technē, 
hē theia epistēmē, and theosophia). Shaw’s article of 1985 stands at the origin of the 
modern study of theurgy that has broken with older approaches dominated by an obses-
sion with “rationality and irrationality.” On this crucial shift, see Tanaseanu-Döbler, 
Theurgy in Late Antiquity, 9 (with references to the most important titles representative 
of the new scholarship in note 3).

Hermetic Spirituality and the Historical Imagination
36
trained practitioners who could tell you what to do and how to do it. If 
such ritual procedures resulted in impressive, even spectacular visionary 
experiences, as claimed by so many texts from Graeco-Roman antiquity, 
it will not do to dismiss such claims as mere “literary fictions” grounded 
in “irrational superstition.”52 Such an approach – which, unfortunately, 
dominated research in these domains until the 1990s – is in fact deeply 
irrational itself, because it fails to provide any realistic account of what, 
according to the textual evidence, may actually have happened in theur-
gic rituals and related practices.
Next to rituals of apparition in which gods appear to human beings, 
we find descriptions of ritual ascent (anagōgē) in which the practitio-
ner himself is carried upwards to heaven and sees spectacular visions. 
A particularly famous example from the “Theban Magical [or Priestly] 
Library” is the so-called Mithras Liturgy (PGM IV 475–829).53 It 
describes how a practitioner guides his “only child,” a woman addressed 
as his “daughter,” upwards to the heavens and into the realm of the 
immortal gods. In preparation of the ascent, seven days of “purity” are 
required in which she must “abstain from meat and bath.”54 After a 
lengthy invocation to the supreme solar deity Helios Mithras, the divine 
source of light, he instructs her to “draw in breath from the rays three 
times, drawing in as much as you can,”55 after which she will see herself 
lifted upwards until reaching a position in midair. At this point she will 
find herself surrounded by utter silence, while watching the planetary 
constellations – not just as physical planets but as deities endowed with 
agency and intelligence. It is at this point that readers may begin to won-
der how such information is to be understood. We find similar proce-
dures of “­inhaling” in the foundational collection of theurgical texts, the 
	52	 See the classic discussion by Festugière (RHT I, 309–354), who specifies his approach in 
these words: “I said fictions because for us, moderns, it is evident that the Hellenistic sto-
ries of revelation contain absolutely no foundation of truth” (RHT I, 309). Festugière’s 
blind spot is on full display in his statement that “the authors who speak of ecstasy and 
celestial ascent are perfectly aware that this does not concern a real fact but a psycho-
logical phenomenon” (RHT I, 315): apparently he does not consider psychological phe-
nomena to be “real facts” or entertain the possibility that they may provide his materials 
with a “foundation of truth.”
	53	 Betz, Greek Magical Papyri, 48–54; Dieterich, Mithrasliturgie; Betz, The “Mithras Lit-
urgy” (discussion of its relation to the Hermetica on 35–38, unfortunately based on 
Festugière’s notion of “literary fictions”).
	54	 PGM IV 735–736 (transl. Betz, “Mithras Liturgy”, 57). This requirement of purity 
appears in the instructions about how the “daughter” can initiate another person, so we 
may logically assume that it applies to her as well.
	55	 PGM IV 539 (transl. Betz, “Mithras Liturgy”, 51).

Heart of Darkness
37
Chaldaean Oracles,56 and it seems clear that this “breath from the rays” 
must mean the divine pneuma that is emanating from the supreme source 
of light. As an effect of inhaling pneuma, the vehicle of the soul (the 
ochēma, see above) becomes illuminated, literally “having the appear-
ance of light.”57 The gods have now taken possession of it and lift the 
soul upwards.58
This is what the authors of the “Mithras Liturgy” and the 
Chaldaean Oracles are telling us, but we are still left at the level of 
pure ­description. How are we to understand what we are reading 
here? To be more precise: what could have been happening to the 
­practitioner that would convince her that she was actually drifting 
upwards in the air, entered a great silence, and beheld the heavenly 
bodies as living beings? This question is the elephant in the room of 
modern ­scholarship on theurgy – a